                                                              LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA            xi




Preface


L
         ocal Government in British Columbia presents a description of the organization and operation of
         local governments in the province, ranging from improvement districts serving small groups of
         residents, through municipalities and school districts of various sizes, to complex regional
administrations such as the Greater Vancouver Regional District (GVRD) now referred to as Metro
Vancouver. The purpose of this book is to enable the citizens of British Columbia to understand the
councils, boards, and trusteeships that govern the provision of local services, and to assist elected and
appointed officials in their efforts to serve the public more effectively. It is also used as a text in
university and college courses.
     Because British Columbia’s local government system has many unique features, especially its re-
gional districts, and because the book explains in some detail how different services are actually produced
and delivered, Local Government in British Columbia also provides insights that international scholars
have found useful. The third edition was translated into Chinese and published by the University of
Peking Press in China.
     As with previous editions, the focus is on how local governments are organized and have evolved to
finance and deliver services. To complement the historical perspective, scholarly research is also used to
set a theme for evaluating any complex multifaceted governmental system. Every effort has been made to
ensure that the information is up to date but, as with any large and complex subject, changes may occur at
any time.
     Preparation of this fourth edition was begun in 2005 and it became an effort that could only be com-
pleted with the assistance of many friends and colleagues. Most important, Rena Bindra of the Ministry of
Community Development conducted and coordinated reviews of the entire manuscript by ministry staff in
both her own and other ministries. She also provided many short drafts on issues where her knowledge
exceeded ours. Chapter 9 was co-authored by Kate Berniaz and Chapter 11 by Sean O’Melinn under the
University of Victoria-Ministry of Community Development Partnership program. The First Nations
Governments Appendix was compiled and edited by Eric Clemens and Cathy Watson, Ministry of
Community Development. Further support was provided by students supported by grants to Emmanuel
Brunet-Jailly of the School of Public Administration at the university. Others who worked directly with
us on the revisions include:
     Jerry Berry, City of Nanaimo
     Allison Habkirk, University of Victoria
     Nicola Marotz, Ministry of Community Development
     Jim McDavid, University of Victoria
     Todd Pugh, CivicInfo BC
     Richard Taylor, Union of British Columbia Municipalities (UBCM)
     Sam Weller, Government Finance Officers Association of BC
     Susie Koivu of UBCM has worked on all editions of Local Government in British Columbia and all
of us appreciate her efforts, especially for the formatting and layout of this edition where input was made
by so many individuals.
     Others who provided valuable information or commented on drafts are listed in the acknowledge-
ments following the bibliography at the end of the book.
