                                                                                        INTRODUCTION          1




 Chapter One
Introduction


L
        ocal governments in British Columbia affect all citizens on a day-to-day basis. This book
        describes how those governments operate in the province. The perspective taken in the book is
        that local governments are a set of institutions that facilitate the ability of citizens to resolve
problems and provide local goods and services in more responsive and efficient ways than a provincial
government could. At the same time, however, it is the provincial government that legislates and regulates
these institutional arrangements. Within this context it is useful to briefly consider the role of local
governments.


1.1     The Role of Local Government
Many political scientists and political philosophers have emphasized the role of local government as a
training ground for democracy, enabling local citizens to participate in collective endeavours and thus to
learn how to temper individual ambitions with concern for others. Most desired from this process is the
achievement of a sense of community among members. Some scholars in this tradition are advocates of
town-meeting or neighbourhood-sized governments to facilitate popular participation. Even those who
question the efficiency of such small governments agree that participation and community are themselves
appropriate goals.
     A quite different perspective is provided by scholars from engineering, economics, and public ad-
ministration, who see the role of local government as a provider of goods and services such as streets,
schools, policing, water supply, and sewage disposal. Many analysts with this viewpoint have neglected
the ideals of citizen participation and have focused instead on economies of scale in production and the
interdependencies of production relationships. These analysts have often recommended relatively large
governments that cover, for instance, entire metropolitan areas. In their concern for structuring govern-
ment according to economies of scale, some go so far as to see no significant distinction between
decentralized central administration and local self-government.
     The perspective taken in this volume is that neither participation nor production efficiency criteria
alone provide an adequate basis for evaluating local government structure. Local government is not a
game in which many should be taxed so others can participate. Communities of people face important
collective problems and participation to resolve those problems is a much more meaningful experience
than participation as an end in itself. Participation has a specific purpose—to resolve common problems,
provide desired services and facilitate control over one’s environment in cooperation with others. For
those who value a sense of community, such feelings may be a part of the experience, but it would be
unrealistic to expect these subjective benefits to be universal. Some may regard a strong sense of
community to be an impediment to individual initiative. The developer, for instance, whose rezoning
proposal is reviewed at a public hearing may see his participation as a necessary evil—a time-consuming
and costly delay, rather than a process that has intrinsic value in and of itself.
