2       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



    Politics and policy
    Political decision making at the local level involves more direct participation than provincial or national
    policymaking. The effects of local government decisions are often immediate and tangible. For example,
    a decision to build a new park, pave a road, or construct a recreation centre results in a recognizable social
    benefit, the cost of which is reflected in annual property tax bills.
        A great variety of decisions are involved in local government operations. A citizen may decide to
    stand as a candidate for office, vote for the candidate of his or her choice, or select an option in a
    referendum. Elected officials decide how to vote on council, and administrators make decisions on service
    production and delivery. Even at the administrative level, citizen participation is common. The resident
    who reports a crime or a fire, or complains that a stop sign is missing from an intersection, is a participant
    in the administration of his or her community. Citizens also form voluntary organizations, such as
    neighbourhood associations and community clubs, to undertake quasi-governmental functions and
    become directly involved in decision making. The resulting environment within which citizens and local
    governments interact is very complex.

    A dual role
    Local governments in B.C. are mechanisms through which local residents can undertake preferred
    collective activities. They are also administrative extensions of the provincial government. This dual role
    is often a source of conflict between local and provincial officials because each tends to regard its role as
    the most important. To complicate matters, various provincial agencies may take divergent approaches to
    disagreements that occur. As local governments operate under provincial legislation, the provincial
    government can always resolve disputes by changing laws to put itself in a superior legal position but
    many, if not most, conflicts appear to be resolved by mutual accommodation rather than provincial fiat.


    1.2     Basic Concepts and Objectives
    All citizens must make choices on how to obtain resources and use those resources. Obtaining resources
    requires knowledge, effort and all the decisions those activities entail. Using resources requires making
    choices as to what to purchase. Citizens try to make these choices so they are better off. There is no
    reason to expect different behaviour when it comes to resolving problems, obtaining local services, and
    paying for them. All of these activities can be accomplished in different ways, and some ways are likely
    to achieve better results for citizens than others.

    Values
    For the purposes of the analyses in this book, a basic value judgement is that institutions of government
    should be designed so people can resolve problems and provide local goods and services collectively,
    in a manner that achieves the greatest net benefit. This approach is the same as trying to design
    institutions that achieve economic efficiency, because economic efficiency, in contrast to technical or
    engineering efficiency, depends on comparing the value of the resources that are used with the value of
    the outputs and outcomes. The concept of economic efficiency must include citizens’ values, and to
    weigh these values, citizens must have mechanisms to voice their preferences and play a role in balancing
    the costs and benefits of local government decisions. Democratic participation is a necessary component
    of economic efficiency.
         When we move from private markets to collective decision making we encounter several additional
    difficulties. For example, the preferences of individuals vary. Some would like more parks, others more
    policing and others, lower taxes. In addition, the same geographical boundaries and the same kind of
    decision-making process will not work for all of the activities in which local governments are engaged. It
