                                                                                        INTRODUCTION          3


is the attempt to create a local government system that can provide opportunities for citizens with
different preferences to deal with different kinds of goods and services over different geographical
boundaries that leads to the establishment of many different kinds of local governments and many
relationships among them. It is this polycentric, multigovernmental organizational system that this book is
designed to help understand.

Evaluative criteria
Multiple criteria are used to evaluate a governmental system and individual governments. The most
important criterion is the extent to which decision makers, who are usually elected officials, have to
balance the benefits to their constituents against the costs that will be imposed on those constituents
with taxes, service charges and/or the costs of complying with regulations. There is no way provincial
ministry officials can monitor and evaluate the decisions of local government officials, and even in a
participatory system with elections, referenda, meetings, and hearings, citizens cannot be involved in all
of the decisions. Thus when examining the properties of a system, the criterion that decision makers
balance benefits and costs, called fiscal equivalence, is an important one. This criterion informs the
discussions throughout this book, especially the financing alternatives examined in Chapter 12.
    It is also useful to have criteria to evaluate performance for the production of an individual service,
program, or capital investment. Because of the diverse activities of local governments, there is no single
way to do these kinds of evaluation. In Chapter 6 we will examine a range of approaches that includes
measures of technical, engineering and operational efficiency, cost-effectiveness, other performance
measures, program evaluations, and cost-benefit analysis.


1.3     Collective Problems
Because the environment in which citizens and local governments interact is a very complex one, it is
useful to examine the kinds of problems people use government to resolve and some of the concepts
associated with these problems.

Public goods and free-riders
Public goods, as defined by economists, are goods or services that are available for everyone to use and
for which, until crowding occurs, one person’s use does not interfere with another’s. For example, when
streets, sidewalks, or dikes are constructed, or eradication of a contagious disease is accomplished,
everyone may benefit and no one is excluded. The fact that the exclusion of benefits for some people is
not generally feasible means that direct charges or voluntary contributions cannot be used for finance.
    With public goods there is no way to exclude “free-riders”—people who refuse to pay—from using or
benefiting. If too many abuse the system, insufficient contributions may mean the good or service cannot
be supported. The solution is to have a government, which has the coercive capacity to tax, to maintain
the provision of public goods that are mutually beneficial. An important dimension of public goods is
maintaining a desirable total environment, to which most land use regulation is devoted.

External effects
External effects are the effects of one’s activities on non-involved parties. Pollution, for example, is a
classic case. Disposal of wastes by a person or business may negatively affect others. Negative external
effects may be dealt with under common law but, rather than rely on court suits by damaged parties, it has
become common for government to regulate such effects. Public health rules are some of the earliest
regulations to deal with potentially negative consequences. Fire codes and anti-noise bylaws are other
examples.
