4       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



    Common pools
    A special kind of external effect occurs with common-pool resources. A common pool is a natural
    resource that is available for communal use but, if too many use it, the resource itself may be destroyed.
    Thus some kind of regulation may be required for resource preservation. A classic common pool is
    groundwater. Overpumping may destroy it. Government authority may be necessary to prevent “free-
    riders” from abusing the system. In British Columbia, common-pool resources are generally regulated by
    the province rather than by local governments, but local governments often draw on common-pool
    resources for water supply and sometimes for liquid waste disposal.

    Utilities
    The provision of utilities, such as water supply and sewerage, is often undertaken by local government.
    Utilities do not possess the characteristics of public goods because it is easy to exclude users who do not
    pay. Their status as natural monopolies and the need for easements along transmission routes has led to
    price regulation, expropriation authority and public provision in most municipalities.

    Business regulation
    Businesses are often regulated to help consumers make an informed purchase. Proper labelling of
    products and the inspection of scales and taxi meters are examples of regulations that prevent cheating
    and protect consumers. Most businesspeople favour controls because they eliminate competition from
    people who cut corners to obtain business. Business regulation may also prevent legitimate competition,
    allowing existing businesses to charge higher prices.

    Welfare
    Not everyone can be expected to, or is able to, participate in labour markets to earn an income adequate
    for a reasonable standard of living. At one time local governments played a major role in supporting
    needy residents but as societies have become more mobile, the responsibility for income redistribution
    and social programs has shifted to senior government. In British Columbia these activities are managed
    primarily by the provincial government but local governments can be directly affected by concentrations
    of welfare recipients and are involved in housing and other social support programs.


    1.4     Overview of Local Governments in British Columbia
    Local governments are a major part of the public sector in British Columbia. The provision of streets,
    sidewalks, schools, public safety, hospitals, parks, recreation facilities, and land use control are some of
    the many functions performed by various local governments in the province. Exhibit 1–1 shows how
    these governments numbers have changed from 1990 to 1999 to 2008.
        Overall, B.C. local governments are governed by more than 2,000 elected officials, the majority of
    whom work part-time and learn to govern local affairs on the job. In addition, many other citizens are
    appointed to boards, commissions, and committees to assist elected officials in making policy decisions
    and supervising administrative agencies. In 2006, these elected and appointed officials supervised more
    than 90,000 local government employees and controlled budgets totalling more than 13 billion dollars, or
    roughly $3,000 per capita. Municipal, regional district, and school district budgets together accounted for
    nearly 90 percent of this amount.
