                                                                                         INTRODUCTION          5


Definition of local government
The term “local government” is sometimes used in a more restrictive sense than in this volume. For
example, in federal and provincial census industrial classification systems, local government includes
municipalities but not school districts, which are included in the education classification.
   In this book, a local government is defined as a government, other than the federal or provincial gov-
ernment, which:
   • has jurisdiction over a defined territory,
   • is governed by a body of locally elected public officials, and
   • has the power under provincial legislation to impose property taxes either directly, indirectly, or
       conditionally.
As indicated in Exhibit 1–1, nine types of local government in British Columbia fit this definition,
including municipalities, an Indian government district, regional districts, the Islands Trust, improvement
districts, regional hospital districts, a regional transportation authority, regional library districts, and
school districts. Three of them have general purposes, the other six have special purposes. Note that we
include school districts, even though no district has used its property-taxing power, which requires a
citizen referendum, since the provincial government took over all school property taxation and provides
90 percent of school district revenue in a conditional transfer. We also include some special-purpose
governments where the governing board consists of elected officials (or primarily of elected officials) but
those officials may have been elected to a municipal council or regional district board and subsequently
appointed to the governing board. One can debate whether TransLink fits our definition of a local
government (mayors appoint a professional board) but we have included it because it performs the same
functions in transportation that are otherwise provided by municipalities and regional districts.

General-purpose local governments
Municipalities, which include British Columbia’s cities, district municipalities, a resort municipality, an
island municipality, towns, and villages, are general-purpose local governments that provide a wide range
of services and regulate a variety of activities. Over 87 percent of B.C.’s population resides within
municipalities, even though the area encompassed by them is less than two percent of the provincial land
area. Municipalities are described in Chapter 3.
    Regional districts perform three roles. First, they are the general-purpose local governments for the
unincorporated areas of the province. Second, they provide a framework for intermunicipal cooperation
through the creation of benefiting areas, such that any combination of municipalities and unincorporated
areas may regulate activities, undertake service provision together and recover the costs from the
beneficiaries. Third, they serve as regional governments for both voluntary activities and a limited
number of activities mandated by the provincial government. Regional districts encompass all of the
province except the sparsely populated Stikine area of northwestern B.C. Regional districts are described
in Chapter 4.
    The Sechelt Indian Government District was created under the federal Sechelt Indian Band Self-
Government Act of 1986 and recognized by the provincial Sechelt Indian Government District Enabling
Act in 1987. The enabling Act provided for the Sechelt Indian Government to utilize provincial legislation
for several functions. It is considered by the provincial government to be another type of municipal
government, but its characteristics are sufficiently distinctive to warrant a separate description in
Chapter 5 as well as in the appendix on First Nation governments.
