                                                                                        INTRODUCTION          7


transportation management services for Greater Vancouver. It is governed by a professional board of
directors appointed by a mayors’ council on regional transportation that represents all the municipalities
within its service area. TransLink’s sources of revenue include property taxes that had previously been
levied for the Greater Vancouver Regional Hospital District, which was dissolved and had its responsi-
bilities transferred to regional health boards in the area.

Other local governing bodies
In addition to the general- and special-purpose local governments discussed above, four other kinds of
organizations need to be acknowledged in an examination of local government in British Columbia. They
are water users’ communities, local areas, local community commissions, and First Nations governments.
     Water users’ communities are run like cooperatives to provide water to small groups of residential
and agricultural water users. There are approximately 107 water users’ communities in the province. They
are described in Chapter 5.
     Local areas are administered by the provincial government. Each provides a specific service to a
small local area for which the local area residents pay additional taxes to the provincial government.
There are currently four local areas in British Columbia, with one transfer to a local government pending.
They are described in Chapter 5.
     Local community commissions may be established by regional districts to perform specified func-
tions in defined parts of a district’s unincorporated electoral areas. Each local community commission is
governed by the regional district director for the electoral area and four commissioners elected from
among the residents of the community. In 2008, there were five local community commissions in the
province. They are described in Chapter 4.
     Although these organizations do not fully meet the definition of local government used in this vol-
ume, they nonetheless play vital roles in the governance of functions and activities that are important to
the communities they serve. In this respect, they may be considered to be illustrative of various societies
and other groups, many of them governed and even managed by citizen volunteers, that make valuable
contributions to the governance of local community affairs in British Columbia.
     Finally, First Nations governments are also involved in the provision of local services, as well as
services otherwise provided by provincial or the national government. They include band councils, tribal
councils, and unique treaty governments. While being established by the federal government or treaties,
they are not part of the British Columbia local government system in a legal sense, but they have
extensive relations with other local governments in B.C. We describe these relationships throughout the
book where relevant and have provided a description of the different kinds of First Nations governments
in the appendix.


1.5     Observations
Local government activities in providing public goods, providing or regulating utilities, regulating
external effects, and regulating businesses range far beyond the examples cited in the foregoing discus-
sion. These activities offer clear opportunities to achieve mutual benefits for citizens through government
to supplement the voluntary exchange of private markets and to be more responsive and efficient than the
provincial government could be for local services.

A caution
Local governments, like other organizations, have the potential to provide mutual benefits to members of
their communities but they may not always do so. In order to get elected, candidates may make promises
that cannot be kept, and some individuals may use political power to gain benefits at the expense of
