8       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



    others. Busy officials may start projects but not monitor them closely enough to assure efficiency, or may
    not provide elected officials with all the information they need to make effective decisions. These
    problems are inherent in all human interaction, not just in local government, but the legal capacity of
    governments to coerce through taxation, fines, expropriation, or incarceration makes the rules under
    which government officials operate extremely important.
        Using government to provide mutual benefits is a bit like playing with fire—it may warm, but it may
    also burn. The important point is that governments are not benevolent abstractions. They are organiza-
    tions comprised of individual human beings like anyone else. Their actions are not always omniscient,
    omnipotent, or wise.

    Diversity and complexity
    Public goods, utility systems, external effects, common pools, and business regulations affect a wide
    variety of government activities, from engineering a sewer system to teaching children to read. Local
    government activities are diverse not only in kind but also in geographic scope. The conditions, lifestyles,
    and preferences of citizens across a large province encompassing a variety of climatic zones and
    specialized resource bases—from rural fishing villages to farm towns and metropolitan centres—add
    diversity and complexity to the demands placed on local governments as they fulfil their dual role, first as
    governments responding to the demands of their local electors, second as administrative extensions of the
    provincial government. The net result is a complex system of many local governments interacting with
    one another and with provincial ministries and agencies. The system that has evolved does possess
    systemic properties, however, this book will endeavour to explain how it functions.


    1.6     Organization of this Book
    The provincial government passes the legislation and makes the rules under which local governments are
    structured and operate. Many ministries are involved. Chapter 2 describes these, including local-
    provincial governmental relationships and some of the local services by the provincial government.
         Municipal, regional district, and other local governments are examined in Chapters 3, 4, and 5. These
    chapters include descriptions of their history, structure, incorporation, governance, organization,
    administration, the service and regulatory functions they perform, and the costs they incur.
         Chapters 6 through 9 are devoted to extensive examinations of the provision and delivery of the pro-
    tective, engineering, and human service functions that account for more than 95 percent of most local
    government budgets, beginning with a discussion of service delivery concepts, options, and approaches to
    evaluation. This part of the book is unique in the literature on local government in Canada—there are
    simply no others like it anywhere else in the country.
         Chapter 10 discusses the various regulatory functions of local governments. Most of it is devoted to
    land use regulation, the single most time-consuming activity for municipal councils and regional district
    boards.
         Labour relations, which have important implications for the efficiency and responsiveness of local
    government service delivery, are briefly considered in Chapter 11. Chapters 3 through 11 are an
    exposition and analysis of the various service and regulatory functions undertaken by local governments
    in British Columbia—i.e. what they actually do.
         While Chapters 3 through 11 examine the activities on which local governments spend, Chapter 12
    discusses how those activities are financed. The sources of revenue for the various types of local
    governments are described, including property taxes, service charges, special assessments, transfers of
    funds from other governments, debt finance, and other minor revenues. The importance of institutional
