                                                                                                  THE PROVINCIAL SETTING                11




    Chapter Two
The Provincial Setting


U
         nder the Constitution Act of 1867 and the Constitution Act of 1982, all responsibilities for
         authority over local governments rest with the provinces. The national government, between
         1971 and 1978, attempted to coordinate its impact on local governments through the Ministry of
State for Urban Affairs, but the ministry simply did not fit into the traditional Canadian political and
administrative framework and was eventually dissolved (Feldman and Milch 1981). The Martin govern-
ment also had a Secretary of State for Cities and Communities and in recent years, the Government of
Canada has wielded more direct influence on local government through grant programs for infrastructural
renewal.
    The British Columbia government affects local governments in three major ways:
    • The province creates and changes the structure of local governments, and sets the rules under
        which local governments may be organized.
    • Provincial legislation makes it mandatory for local governments to perform certain functions and
        activities as administrative extensions of the province.
    • Provincial legislation authorizes all activities that local governments may undertake.
Most of the rules enabling local self-government are set forth in the Local Government Act, the Commu-
nity Charter,1 and other acts administered by the ministry responsible for municipal affairs. School
districts responsible for elementary and secondary education, which come under the School Act and an
education ministry, are the major exception. A number of other ministries also have direct relationships
with local governments and/or provide some local services. Overall, the interaction between the provin-
cial and local governments is extensive.


2.1       The Provincial Government
British Columbia, like other Canadian provinces, has a parliamentary system of government. In its
original conception, parliament consisted of the Crown, Lords, and Commons, sharing power and
providing for checks and balances. As in most former British colonies, such checks and balances have
been reduced in British Columbia and the legislature itself has become the equivalent of the parliament.
The Crown is still represented by a Lieutenant Governor who has the power to give vice-regal assent to
laws, orders and regulations.

The legislature and cabinet
The provincial government is a direct continuation of the pre-confederation colonial government. The
elected legislature has the sole right to enact laws but in practice power lies with the executive council—
the cabinet. The cabinet is appointed by the premier, who is the leader of the political party that has the
most seats in the legislature or, in some instances, which has fewer than half the seats but is able to
arrange for voting support from other members of the legislature. While the cabinet is legally subject to

1
     The name of the Municipal Act was changed to Local Government Act in 2000 and a new Community Charter was enacted in 2003. These
changes are discussed in Chapter 3.
