12       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     the legislature, party discipline creates a situation where legislation proposed by the cabinet is approved
     as long as the government has a majority of the votes.

     The policymaking and legislative process
     Government policies, legislative bills, and equally important, orders-in-council or regulations are the
     products of ministries and cabinet committees, although members of the legislature who are not cabinet
     ministers may sit on cabinet committees and help determine policy in party caucus. They may also
     influence cabinet and committee-drafted legislation during amendment processes. The cabinet uses
     standing committees and special committees as needed to review the substance of proposed legislation
     and regulations. Reports from these committees and from ministries go forward to the Treasury Board,
     which reviews fiscal implications, and usually to other central coordinating committees that set priorities
     and review draft bills. The cabinet itself then deals with the proposals.
         Bills submitted to the legislature require three readings and the assent of the Lieutenant Governor.
     Orders-in-council must also be approved by the Lieutenant Governor. As all actions come under the
     supervision of the premier or one of the ministers, these individuals are required to respond to questions
     raised in the legislature.
         A bill enacted by the legislature must be proclaimed in order for it to become law. In some cases, all
     or parts of an act may not be proclaimed. For example, parts of the 1979 Ombudsman Act that provide
     authority to review actions of local governments were not proclaimed until 1993 to 1995 because it was
     considered that the office needed time to get established before the scope of its authority was extended
     beyond the provincial government and its agencies.
         In addition to these policymaking and legislative procedures, individual members of the legislature
     may propose private bills. They are processed through a private bills committee for possible enactment by
     the legislature. A private bill is unlikely to pass unless the government of the day does not oppose it.
     Interestingly, the Vancouver Charter of 1886 was a private bill but since 1990 has been amended as a
     government bill.
         In practice, major policy changes and new legislation are often prepared completely within a provin-
     cial government ministry. Cabinet can process legislation in secret and simply announce it to the
     legislature. However, a requirement for consultations with the Union of British Columbia Municipalities
     (UBCM) on any legislation affecting local governments (except schools), was enacted in 1998 (the first in
     Canada) and is embedded in the Community Charter. The net result of changes since the late 1990s is a
     policymaking process in which, for local government legislation, there is consultation outside of cabinet
     and the legislature. This is not always the case for other legislation.


     2.2     Local Government Organizations and Interest Groups
     Legislators are strongly influenced by political considerations that include being responsive to groups
     with particular objectives who actively lobby ministries of the government. Local government organiza-
     tions that play a role in provincial policymaking include:
         • Union of British Columbia Municipalities (UBCM)
         • Municipal Finance Authority (MFA)
         • Municipal Insurance Association (MIA)
         • Local Government Management Association (LGMA)
         • Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA)
         • Municipal Information Systems Association (MISA)
         • BC School Trustees Association (BCSTA)
         • BC Public School Employers’ Association (BCPSEA)
