                                                                               THE PROVINCIAL SETTING          13


    •   BC Confederation of Parent Advisory Councils (BCCPAC)
    •   BC School Superintendents Association (BCSSA)
    •   BC Association of School Business Officials (BCASBO)
    •   BC Principals’ & Vice-Principals’ Association (BCPVPA)
The UBCM, MFA, MIA, BCSTA, and BCPSEA are directed by locally elected council or board
representatives and actively deal with the provincial government on matters of interest to their members,
as does the BCCPAC. The other groups represent local government administrators and are less politically
active, but they still deal regularly with provincial ministries regarding matters of concern to their
members.
    The UBCM represents all municipalities and regional districts in British Columbia as well as the
Islands Trust. It also plays a significant policy and administrative role in managing grants and programs
for local governments. UBCM has played an increasingly influential role since 1996, when its efforts
resulted in a formal Protocol of Recognition that stated the principles underlying the relationship between
the provincial and local governments in B.C. and established a joint council of provincial and UBCM
officials to implement the agreement. A 1997 sub-agreement led to a radical transformation of the
Municipal Act in 1998–2000, including a change in name to the Local Government Act. The UBCM also
played a key role in shaping the 2003 Community Charter legislation, in seeking to ensure that local
government interests are effectively represented in treaty negotiations, and in generally influencing
provincial policies and initiatives that affect local governments in B.C.
    Many other groups play a role in representing their constituents on local government issues to the
provincial government, such as the BC Association of Chiefs of Police, the Fire Chiefs’ Association of
BC, the Planning Institute of BC, the Urban Development Institute, the Canadian Home Builders’
Association, the BC Water and Waste Association, the Building Officials’ Association of BC, the Licence
Inspectors’ and Bylaw Officers’ Association of BC, the BC Museums Association, and the BC Recreation
and Parks Association. With organizations like these active, local governments and local government
officials often have a significant voice in the policymaking process, as do other interest groups affected
by provincial policy on local governments.


2.3     Provincial Ministry and Agency Functions Related to Local
        Government
Provincial ministries that set compulsory rules or mandates for local governments in B.C. include those
responsible for municipal affairs, public school education, environment, finance, health, labour, law
enforcement, and transportation. There are also a number of other ministries and agencies whose activities
affect, complement, and/or entail cooperation with local governments.
    It is important to keep in mind that the functions, responsibilities, names, and reporting relationships
of government ministries and agencies tend to vary over the years. For example, between 1990 and 2008,
the ministry responsible for municipal affairs was variously known as Municipal Affairs, Recreation and
Culture (1990–92), Municipal Affairs, Recreation and Housing (1992–93), Municipal Affairs (1993–96),
Municipal Affairs and Housing (1996–98), Municipal Affairs (1998–2001), Community, Aboriginal and
Women’s Services (2001–05), Community Services (2005–08), and Community Development (2008–).
Similarly, law enforcement has sometimes come under an attorney general, other times under a solicitor
general.
    For clarity and consistency, the following ministries and agencies are generally identified by their
functions rather than by specific names. For example, the ministry responsible for municipal affairs is
