14       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     denoted by that term or, more simply, by the words “municipal affairs ministry.” Except for municipal
     affairs and education, which are described first, the functions are listed in alphabetical order.

     Municipal affairs
     Municipal affairs functions in B.C. include:
        • Administration of legislation and regulations that set the boundaries of and the basic structure for
            the governance and operation of municipalities, regional districts, improvement districts and spe-
            cial areas
        • Supervision of the Islands Trust
        • Supervision by the inspector of municipalities, especially with respect to debt finance
        • Administration of the local areas described in Chapter 5
        • Supply of municipal services to the unincorporated University Endowment Lands adjacent to the
            University of British Columbia
        • Administration of grant and revenue-sharing programs for local governments, including advice on
            infrastructure projects
        • Facilitation of community and regional planning and land use regulation
        • Administration of the provincial Board of Examiners’ certification and scholarship programs for
            local government administrators
        • Provincial participation in such initiatives as tripartite urban development agreements
     The municipal affairs ministry is the dominant one for municipalities, regional districts, improvement
     districts and islands under the Islands Trust. The ministry has also been responsible at different times for
     public library services, heritage conservation services, the real property assessment system, building
     regulation, safety regulation and social housing.

     Education
     The education ministry supervises the administration of school districts, administers provincial funding of
     the districts and supervises finances.

     Aboriginal affairs
     There has been a provincial ministry dedicated to First Nations activities for many years, but First Nations
     activities involve many other ministries that support economic development, education, health, social
     welfare services and treaty negotiations. The provincial ministries responsible for fisheries, lands, forests,
     mines and transportation also deal extensively with First Nations with respect to land and resource
     questions that also affect local governments. Where provincial legislation provides for First Nations
     relationships with local government they are treated in the relevant section of the book. However, First
     Nations governments that are not established by Final Agreements through the British Columbia Treaty
     Process are governed by federal legislation. More information is available in the Appendix, First Nations
     Governments.

     Building and safety regulation
     Building and safety regulatory functions include administration of the British Columbia Building Code
     and plumbing regulations by local governments, fire safety regulations by the Office of the Fire Commis-
     sioner, and standards and inspections for electrical, gas, boiler, elevator, railway, and other technical
     installations by the BC Safety Authority. The functions also include support of the Building Code Appeal
     Board and the provision of policy advice on British Columbia’s building regulatory system, especially
     with respect to building safety and accessibility. Responsibility for these functions has been assigned to
     different ministries over the years. In 1998, following the “leaky condo problem,” for which some
