16       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     The ministry responsible for finance also manages the registry for manufactured homes, which is
     important for compiling a proper assessment roll.

     Health services
     Health service functions that involve local government include ambulance services, public health services
     and regulation, and the provision of health care facilities and equipment, often in cooperation with one or
     more regional hospital districts. Overall responsibility for health services rests with a single health
     ministry but most services are delivered by six health authorities:
         • A Provincial Health Services Authority that coordinates and/or provides provincial programs and
             specialized services, such as cardiac care and transplants
         • Five regional health authorities (Fraser, Interior, Northern, Vancouver Coastal, and Vancouver
             Island) that are further subdivided into 16 health service delivery areas
     The six health authorities were created in 2001 to replace 52 regional and community bodies that had
     been established between 1993 to 1997 in an effort to decentralize authority over health services from the
     ministry to local communities.

     Human resources
     Provincial human resource functions include labour relations, employment standards, occupational health
     and safety, workers’ compensation, pension programs, and a variety of human resource development
     programs. The responsibility for many of these functions typically rests with a labour ministry but a
     number of other ministries and agencies are usually involved in the delivery of various programs. The
     Labour Relations Code provides the framework for local government labour-management relations,
     WorkSafeBC administers occupational health and safety regulations that affect local government workers,
     and the BC Pension Corporation manages local government pension plans.

     Justice and law enforcement
     Justice and law enforcement functions that involve direct relationships with local governments or delivery
     of services at a local level include police services, criminal justice, family law, human rights protection,
     court administration, courthouse management, legal aid, victim services, sheriff services, and correctional
     services. Responsibility for these functions may rest entirely with an attorney general’s ministry, or law
     enforcement may be separately assigned to a solicitor general’s ministry.
         As in all provinces except Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario, and Quebec, the Royal Canadian
     Mounted Police serve as B.C.’s provincial police through a federal-provincial contract. The provincial
     police protect unincorporated areas and municipalities with populations of less than 5,000, while larger
     municipalities must provide their own police services, which can be provided by the RCMP as well.
     Training for independent municipal police department members, fire inspectors, firefighters, and
     paramedical personnel is provided by the Justice Institute of British Columbia. Police services are
     discussed in Chapter 7.

     Real property
     Provincial government real property activities that are most important to local government include
     subdivision control in unincorporated areas and property assessment. Subdivision control in unorganized
     areas has for many years been the responsibility of approving officers designated by the transportation
     ministry to ensure that suitable access and highway dedication is obtained for rural subdivisions. While
     regional districts may now appoint the approving officers, none have done so.
         The British Columbia Assessment Authority, called BC Assessment, is responsible for real property
     assessment throughout the province and on some Indian reserves, where First Nations have contracted the
