                                                                               THE PROVINCIAL SETTING          17


BCAA to assess their properties. The Property Assessment Appeal Board adjudicates appeals from
decisions made by local property assessment review panels.
    Provincial government property is managed by several agencies. Primarily a division within the agri-
culture ministry manages provincial Crown lands, which comprise 94 percent of the land in B.C., but
some responsibilities are shared with or delegated to other ministries with economic functions, such as
environment, forestry, fossil fuel extraction, mining, and tourism. A separate Integrated Land Manage-
ment Bureau coordinates activities in the areas of strategic planning, natural resource access,
environmental sustainability, and services to the public, including the operation of FrontCounterBC, a
single-window service for the clients of provincial natural resource ministries and agencies. The
provincial government’s real estate portfolio and accommodation services are managed by a government
services ministry division, Accommodation and Real Estate Services (ARES).
    The Land Title and Survey Authority of BC, established in 2004, is responsible for managing, operat-
ing and maintaining British Columbia’s land title and land survey systems. British Columbia uses the
Torrens land title registration system, which is more efficient and provides greater security of tenure than
other systems.

Social welfare
Social welfare functions include programs for individual income assistance, disability assistance, child
protection, family development, adoption and reunion services, foster care, child care, children and youth
with special needs, youth justice, adult community living, and social housing. Responsibility for these
programs is typically divided among a number of ministries and agencies. While the responsibility for
most social welfare programs is borne by the provincial government, some local governments in more
heavily urbanized parts of the province have found it necessary in recent years to introduce programs of
their own aimed at helping people who would otherwise fall through the gaps, such as those who are
homelessness or suffer from drug abuse.
     The management of social housing owned by the provincial and federal governments is the responsi-
bility of the British Columbia Housing Management Commission, which also provides assistance to
nonprofit housing agencies and cooperatives. The Provincial Rental Housing Corporation holds provin-
cial property for social and other low-cost housing, as well as land under long-term leases to nonprofit
societies. Social housing and homelessness are discussed in Chapter 9.

Transportation
Provincial transportation functions that involve local governments include:
    • Provincial highway transportation policy and programs
    • The planning, construction, operation, and maintenance of B.C.’s highways, including arterial
        highways within municipalities, and inland ferries
    • The provision of public transit services by BC Transit in cooperation with 50 B.C. communities
    • The regulation of taxis, limousines, intercity buses, and other components of the commercial
        passenger industry by the Passenger Transportation Board
The transportation ministry participates with local governments in developing regional growth strategies
and resource management plans, and administers local programs and projects, some of which are funded
by the federal government. The ministry also provides grants and other assistance for ports, community
airports, local cycling networks, and alternative transportation modes.

Other provincial ministry and agency functions
Several other provincial functions involve direct relations with local governments or the provision of
services at a local level. They include:
