18       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



         •   The Agricultural Land Commission is responsible for the B.C. agricultural land reserve system.
             The Commission helps local governments plan for agricultural land reserve (ALR) land uses and
             may delegate to them the power to make subdivision and non-farm use decisions.
         •   Government agents’ offices provide local citizens in over 50 B.C. communities with one-stop
             access to provincial government information and services.
         •   The Provincial Capital Commission sponsors activities and works aimed at enhancing the provin-
             cial capital region. Five of the PCC’s eleven board members are appointed by the four core
             municipalities in the region: Victoria, Saanich, Oak Bay, and Esquimalt.
         •   The British Columbia Lottery Corporation distributed $76.1 million in funding to local govern-
             ments where casinos and community gaming centres were located in 2006–07. It also provided
             the funds for $142.4 million in gaming grants to some 6,000 community and charitable organiza-
             tions, such as volunteer fire departments, sport clubs, music societies, search-and-rescue groups,
             seniors’ groups, etc.
         •   The Provincial Emergency Program helps local governments develop and maintain emergency
             preparation, response and recovery programs, as discussed in Chapter 7.
     This list is reasonably comprehensive but by no means exhaustive. For the purposes of this book, it
     illustrates the extent and nature of provincial involvement in functions and activities that oversee, support,
     or complement local government functions and activities.


     2.4     Statutory Officers of the Legislature Related to Local Government
     Four statutory officers of the legislature—the Auditor General, the Information and Privacy Commis-
     sioner, the Ombudsman, and the Police Complaint Commissioner—perform important watchdog
     functions that affect local government. They are responsible to the provincial legislature and are
     independent of the government. The latter three officers also provide citizens with alternatives to the
     courts that help ensure fair decision making by local governments. Other statutory offices of the
     legislature include the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and Children’s Advocate, but they are unlikely
     to be involved with local governments.

     Auditor General
     The Office of the Auditor General was established by the Auditor General Act of 1977 to provide the
     legislature with independent assessments of the provincial government’s financial and operational
     accountability, including the effectiveness and efficiency of program performance. The office conducts
     performance and compliance audits or reviews that sometimes directly relate to local government
     concerns, such as: purchasing in school districts (1994); BC Transit productivity and marketing perform-
     ance (1997); earthquake preparedness (1997); governance and management of social housing (1999);
     protecting drinking water sources (1999); local government preparedness for managing fire risks in
     wildlands-urban interface zones (2000); fostering a safe learning environment in B.C. schools (2000);
     transportation in Greater Vancouver (2001); government oversight of public-sector pension plans (2003);
     internal audit processes of health authorities (2004); and administrative and management processes of
     First Nations treaty negotiations (2006). The Auditor General Act does not preclude the Auditor General
     from performing audits for local governments but they use private firms to audit their financial statements
     and, in some cases, to assess program performance.

     Information and Privacy Commissioner
     The Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner was established in 1993 to monitor and enforce
     compliance with the 1992 Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, including the informa-
