                                                                               THE PROVINCIAL SETTING         19


tion access and privacy protection practices of the provincial government, provincial agencies, local
governments, and self-governing professional bodies. The office also investigates individual complaints
and requests to review decisions, acts, or failures to act, and is responsible for overseeing compliance
with the 2003 Personal Information Protection Act, which contains rules about the collection, use, and
disclosure of personal information by more than 300,000 private-sector organizations, including
businesses, charities, associations, trade unions, and trusts.
    In fiscal 2006–07, the office received 4,828 files and closed 4,825. The files involving local govern-
ments usually comprise a small percentage of the total, although some are of particular concern, such as
described in the 2006 report on municipal surveillance bylaws.

Ombudsman
The Office of the Ombudsman was established by the Ombudsman Act of 1979 to investigate and report
on complaints about grievous government actions, failures to act, decisions, or procedures. Local
governments were covered by the Act but the relevant sections were not proclaimed until 1992 to 1995.
     Complaints about local governments typically account for about five percent of the Ombudsman’s
cases. In 2006, the office dealt with a total of 6,438 cases, of which 306 involved local governments. Due
to budget constraints, 154 of these local government cases were declined for investigation and another 94,
all involving school districts, were placed in a holding queue for eventual investigation after a three- to
six-month delay. Governmental bodies almost always accept the Ombudsman’s recommendations.

Police Complaint Commissioner
In 1997, an amendment to the Police Act the B.C. Police Commission, which had previously been
responsible for dealing with complaints about police, was transitioned into the Office of the Police
Complaint Commissioner. The office is empowered to receive, consider, and dispose of complaints and
requests for review of the services provided by independent municipal police departments, some First
Nations police services, and the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit (formerly the Organized
Crime Agency). Complaints about police services delivered by the RCMP, in its capacity as the provin-
cial police force or a municipal police unit, are dealt with by the Commission for Public Complaints
Against the RCMP, a federal body.


2.5     Judicial Review
Local governments must act within the law. In addition to seeking redress through the Information and
Privacy Commissioner, the Ombudsman, the Police Complaint Commissioner, the Inspector of Munici-
palities, or senior officials of other ministries that supervise local governments, citizens may challenge
local government legislation or decisions on both procedural and substantive grounds in the courts. Since
1979, the Judicial Review Procedure Act has provided a simplified method for petitioning the Supreme
Court of British Columbia to adjudicate a challenged decision.


2.6     Observations on the Provincial Setting
Over the years, the provincial government has assumed responsibility for some functions for which local
governments or agencies were once primarily responsible, usually in response to social and economic
change. The centralization of the social welfare function can be attributed to increasing social mobility.
Health services that were once provided by locally elected bodies, such as hospital society boards, are
now provided by centralized agencies that can presumably respond more effectively to the higher costs
associated with technological advances and growing demands for service. Elementary and secondary
education funding and policymaking is now handled by the province, with a lesser role for school boards.
