                                                                              MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS            21




 Chapter Three
Municipal Governments


I
   ncorporated municipalities—cities, district municipalities, towns, and villages—are the main form of
   local government for densely settled areas in British Columbia. They predate the merger of the
   colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia and their subsequent confederation with the
Dominion of Canada. More than 87 percent of the provincial population resides within municipal
boundaries.


3.1     History
Between 1849 and 1859, when the Hudson’s Bay Company was the colonizing agent for Vancouver
Island, the trading firm developed roads, a volunteer fire department, and schools in Victoria. When the
gold rush into the interior began in 1858, Victoria became a prominent commercial centre, and streets,
drainage, and fire protection became serious concerns. The Vancouver Island colonial government dealt
directly with these problems when it assumed control in 1859, using a liquor tax as its source of revenue.
Three years later the City of Victoria was incorporated.
    On the mainland, the Colony of British Columbia was established in 1858 and a wooded hillside on
the north side of the Fraser River was declared the new capital in 1859. As the colony had a shortage of
funds, it incorporated the City of New Westminster in 1860 to enable it to proceed with the clearing of
streets and the creation of a city. In 1865, the colony passed a general ordinance that laid down guidelines
for future municipal organization. The municipalities permitted under the ordinance were of the open-
ended “home-rule” type—they could do anything not otherwise forbidden by law. The ordinance became
applicable to Vancouver Island when the two colonies were merged in 1866.
    After confederation with Canada in 1871, a new Act for municipalities was passed in 1873. The Act
replaced the previous legislation and enabled municipalities to undertake a range of activities, but it did
not provide for incurring debt, nor did it include any mandatory activities that the municipalities were
required to perform. The powers granted to them included the authority to tax persons and property and
collect fees for granting licences. New Westminster and Victoria were immediately brought under the
Act, followed shortly by Chilliwack, Langley, North Cowichan and, in 1874, Maple Ridge and Nanaimo.
The Act was amended in 1881 to provide for municipal borrowing.

The 1896 Acts
In 1896, the existing legislation was superseded by the Municipal Incorporation Act and the Municipal
Clauses Act. These Acts provided for two basic kinds of municipalities: cities or towns for small, densely
populated communities; and districts for low-density, spread-out areas that desired some form of local
government. The period from 1890 to 1915 was an active one for the incorporation of cities, towns, and
districts in B.C., but no more were incorporated until after World War II. In 1920, however, very small
communities were authorized to incorporate as villages. Villages were created at a slow rate from then
until the mid-1930s. The Municipal Incorporation Act and the Municipal Clauses Act set the basic
framework for municipal government as it now exists and only minor changes were made until the
Municipal Act was adopted in 1957 and regional districts were created in 1965.
