22       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     The home-rule issue
     One very important issue, that of home rule for municipalities, was hotly debated in the early part of the
     twentieth century. Legislation that would have permitted it was introduced in B.C. in 1919 but it failed to
     pass. Home rule, which is common in the western United States, would have permitted municipalities to
     do anything that was not explicitly prohibited by provincial legislation, instead of only what the legisla-
     ture specifically authorized. Although home rule was denied to municipalities, few constraints were
     exercised if they had a good reason for wishing to undertake some new function. Thus, by 1986, the
     Municipal Act listed over 250 voluntary functions for cities, towns, villages, and district municipalities.
         With the enactment of the Local Government Act in 2000 and the Community Charter in 2003, mu-
     nicipalities faced even fewer constraints as they were given broad powers to provide services and regulate
     many activities, primarily within 16 spheres of jurisdiction. This legislation’s permissive nature gave
     British Columbia’s municipal governments an operating framework that is closer to home rule, although
     the municipal affairs ministry still retains some important supervisory powers.

     The Vancouver Charter and Resort Municipality of Whistler Act
     In 1886, the Canadian Pacific Railway decided to extend the railroad from its original Port Moody
     terminus to Coal Harbour. In response, the legislature passed a private bill that incorporated the City of
     Vancouver to encompass the terminal area. A population boom immediately ensued. In 1887, Vancouver
     became the western terminus for the completed CPR, and by 1888 the municipal government was
     supplying a population of 8,000 with streets, wooden paving, waterworks, and sewers. The Vancouver
     Charter remains as separate legislation although it has much in common with the Local Government Act
     and Community Charter.
         In the 1970s the provincial government had to decide how to organize the Whistler area, which
     needed a municipal government for development but had no population. The result was the Resort
     Municipality of Whistler Act (1975), which allowed the starting of the municipality with an appointed
     council. The municipality comes under the Local Government Act and Community Charter, with some
     additional unique provisions in the Resort Municipality of Whistler Act.

     Early supervision
     Prior to 1912, there was virtually no provincial supervision of municipalities. In that year, formal audits
     were first required and the Office of the Inspector of Municipalities was created in the Department of the
     Attorney General in 1914. The Inspector provided advice on financial affairs, especially debt creation,
     and could oversee general municipal activities for compliance with the law. Approval of municipal
     borrowing by the Inspector also became compulsory. The Inspector moved to the Department of
     Municipal Affairs when it was created in 1934.

     Reform of the Municipal Act
     In 1997, in consultation with the Union of British Columbia Municipalities, the provincial government
     made a multiyear commitment to substantially reform the Municipal Act, with the objectives of enhancing
     the breadth and flexibility of municipal powers of governance while maintaining appropriate provisions
     for accountability to citizens and provincial involvement in local affairs. A few reforms involving the
     removal of more than 50 requirements for provincial approval or supervision were included in Bill 46–
     1997, but the major changes were made in Bill 31–1998, Bill 88–1999 and Bill 14–2000.
         Bill 31–1998 recognized local government as an “order of government,”2 articulated the purposes of
     the Act and local government, stated the principles of the relationship between the provincial and local

     2
         This is, however, a provincially legislated and not a constitutional change.
