                                                                              MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS            23


governments in relation to the Municipal Act, and provided for new, broad corporate powers, such as the
ability to acquire property and enter into agreements. Specific measures included provisions for entering
into public-private partnerships (P3), elimination of some requirements for referenda, expanded provi-
sions for citizens to petition against proposed local government actions, and elimination of the statutory
requirement for the positions named “clerk,” “treasurer,” and regional district “secretary,” with more
flexibility as to how their responsibilities could be assigned.
     Bill 88–1999 broadened powers to provide any service considered desirable and to regulate business,
and provided for financial management reform, election process improvements, and more open govern-
ment. Specific measures included a requirement for five-year financial planning that replaced the old
annual budget process, the use of the term “parcel taxes” to denote both frontage and parcel taxes,
expanded authority in relation to parcel taxes, fees, and charges, changes to the municipal tax collection
process, and campaign finance disclosure system improvements.
     With Bill 14–2000, the Municipal Act became the Local Government Act. Other specific measures in
this bill included the provision of broad service powers to regional districts, as discussed in Chapter 4,
changes to planning and land use legislation, as discussed in Chapter 10, and consolidation and clarifica-
tion of a counter-petition process where elector assent to bylaws was required.

The Community Charter
In 2003, the provincial government took the reform process considerably further when it enacted Bill 14,
the Community Charter. The process that resulted in the development of this legislation was a unique
provincial-local partnership under which the Community Charter Council, consisting of local and
provincial representatives, became responsible for drafting legislation to increase the autonomy of
municipalities. The Community Charter and the Local Government Act now form the foundation of the
legislative framework under which all of British Columbia’s municipalities operate.
     The foundation of the Community Charter rests on a set of principles that recognizes municipalities as
an “order of government” that is autonomous, responsible, and accountable. The Community Charter
provides a legal framework of municipal powers/duties providing authority and flexibility for municipali-
ties to address community needs. It also sets out important principles for municipal-provincial relations
that emphasize such things as “no downloading,” mutual respect, cooperation, and harmonization.
     The Community Charter differs significantly from previous municipal legislation, which had been
more prescriptive because it grants municipalities the legal status of a natural person (corporate powers),
broad powers to provide a service (including broad authority for intermunicipal schemes and authority to
establish corporations), and regulatory powers to regulate, prohibit, or impose requirements within
defined spheres of jurisdiction, as discussed in Chapter 10. It also provides additional powers with respect
to roads and highways (including title to most local roads), control of dangerous dogs, hazardous
conditions, and declared nuisances.
     These broad powers do have limits. Within the regulatory spheres, a municipality may regulate with
respect to business, signs, and firearms, but it may not prohibit or impose requirements on business, may
not prohibit signs, and may not impose requirements regarding firearms. Other limitations include a
general prohibition from providing assistance to business except in prescribed circumstances, and the fact
that the new powers do not apply in the areas of planning, land use management, and heritage conserva-
tion, which are still covered by the Local Government Act.
     Another important limitation established under the Community Charter is the concept of concurrent
regulatory authority, under which it is recognized that in five spheres (public health, protection of the
natural environment, wildlife, building standards, and prohibition of soil deposit or removal), municipali-
ties and the province have a shared interest in regulating activities. Within these areas of concurrent
