24       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     authority, municipalities are provided with powers to adopt bylaws, but are subject to provincial
     involvement.
         The broad powers provided by the Community Charter are balanced with an accountability and public
     participation framework that covers such matters as elector involvement (i.e., the requirement for voter
     approval in each municipality before a municipal amalgamation can proceed), reporting to electors (i.e.,
     the requirement to publish notice of and provide an opportunity for input on proposed business regulation
     bylaws), and provisions governing the ethical conduct of local governments and their officials, including
     conflict of interest processes, restrictions on accepting gifts, and other similar measures. Municipalities
     are also required to produce an annual municipal report and hold an annual municipal meeting at which
     the report is discussed. The annual report must contain performance measures for gauging whether or not
     municipal objectives are met year to year, although the exact measures to be used by a given municipality
     are not prescribed.
         Other matters covered by provisions of the Community Charter include a requirement that annual
     financial statements be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP),
     tax exemption powers, bylaw enforcement, rules for borrowing, mandatory provincial consultations with
     local governments in specific situations (such as before amending the Community Charter or the Local
     Government Act), and a dispute resolution process for resolving disputes between a municipality and
     another local government, provincial government, or a Crown corporation.
         While the provincial government has provided broad powers to local governments, it has also estab-
     lished limits designed to protect or enhance specific provincial interests articulated by ministries other
     than municipal affairs. These limits often take the form of legislated overrides on local government land
     use or other regulatory powers on matters such as projects determined by the province to be “significant,”
     public health, or independent power projects. Such legislation has caused concern among local govern-
     ments, who see it as representing an erosion of the powers and principle of autonomy under the
     Community Charter and the Local Government Act. To date, however, the legislation has been more
     notable for its potential than its actual impact.
         The 1997 to 2003 legislative reforms constituted a significant departure from the relatively high lev-
     els of provincial government control over municipal activities that had evolved in B.C. over the years.
     While the changes still provided for some provincial controls, the expansion of municipal corporate
     powers was an important move towards the kind of autonomy associated with home rule. The B.C.
     changes had counterparts elsewhere in Canada, notably in Alberta, but B.C. municipalities now have
     more independent corporate authority than those in any other province.


     3.2     Incorporation, Expansion, and Amalgamation
     Part 2 of the Local Government Act contains the rules regarding municipal incorporation, boundary
     extension or redefinition, area reduction, and dissolution.

     The incorporation process
     Incorporations, boundary extensions, and changes in municipal status in B.C. have historically been the
     result of local requests. Although the minister responsible for municipal affairs can unilaterally direct that
     a vote on incorporation be taken, the common practice is for residents to ask the ministry for assistance.
     The ministry then provides information on the implications of the proposed change and gives a small
     grant for an incorporation study. Boundaries are agreed and a vote is taken. If more than 50 percent of the
     votes favour incorporation, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may provide letters patent to incorporate
     the area. The letters patent:
