                                                                                                       MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS                     27


for the village, the passage in 1988 of Bill C-115—federal Indian Act amendments which clarified the
right of First Nations to collect property taxes on their reserves—led the Burns Lake Indian Band to
indicate that it wished to take over the collection of taxes on the mill property. The Village of Burns Lake
eventually lost all of the tax revenue from the mill and because it had never provided any services to the
mill in the first place it could not recapture any of the revenue by selling services to the band.
     The Prince George case illustrates the nature of regional amalgamation, which has been an issue in
urban areas such as Greater Victoria. The Burns Lake case illustrates the kind of issue that can arise
between municipal governments that fall under provincial jurisdiction, and First Nations governments that
fall under federal jurisdiction.

The amalgamation issue
According to the Community Charter, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may not issue letters patent
incorporating a new municipality from two or more existing municipalities unless a majority in each of
the existing municipalities votes for it. In other words, the provincial government is now prohibited from
forcing the amalgamation of municipalities against the will of the people affected by the action, as has
been done since 1995 in Ontario, Quebec, and Nova Scotia.
     Regional amalgamation in urbanized areas has typically been advocated for reasons of efficiency,
equity and, more recently, economic development. Noteworthy examples of amalgamations in Canada
include the creation of a larger City of Winnipeg in 1972, the Halifax Regional Municipality in 1996, and
a larger City of Toronto in 1998. In these three cases, the amalgamations were enacted by the provincial
governments without a referendum. While the arguments for amalgamation are superficially attractive, a
growing body of research suggests that amalgamations rarely, if ever, achieve the objective of increased
efficiency and that the other arguments are debatable.
     The efficiency argument holds that amalgamation, with its potential for simplifying government,
rationalizing service delivery arrangements, and realizing economies of scale, is the logical remedy for
the inefficiencies, extra costs, and waste attributed to the political and operational fragmentation of an
urban area like Greater Victoria, with its 13 municipalities. Only a relatively small proportion of local
government services possess economies of scale and, in many cases, their regionalization has already
been achieved without amalgamation. Examples of this can be found in Greater Victoria, where four
municipalities cooperated many years ago in establishing the Greater Victoria Water District, or where a
body such as the Capital Regional District has assumed responsibility for services like the regional water
system, which the CRD took over from the GVWD in 1998. For other services, especially those that are
labour intensive, regionalization could result in diseconomies of scale associated with the expanded
bureaucracy needed to ensure uniformity of service delivery throughout the area.3
     The equity argument is based on the premise that services and property tax burdens should be uni-
formly distributed throughout the urban area. This argument is attractive, with its connotations of greater
fairness, but it also suggests increased uniformity and less diversity in the choices available to local
citizens. In choosing where they wish to live, people take into account many factors, including local
services, property taxes, and their ability to have a voice in local government. Regional amalgamation
tends to reduce the available choices and the ability to participate in local municipal affairs. Normally,
each councillor in the amalgamated municipality would represent many more constituents than the
average councillor in a smaller municipality, and the cost of running for council could become prohibitive

3
     The most comprehensive analysis of the costs of local governments in the United States concluded that costs were lower where there was a
multiplicity of municipalities and some kind of regional organization, but where the municipalities accounted for most of the local government
spending (Boyne 1992). This is exactly the structure that has evolved in the Capital Regional District. A complete review of the evidence on
amalgamation can be found in Bish (2001).
