28        LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     for some people who might otherwise stand for election. Advocates of amalgamation sometimes argue
     that costs would be saved by reducing the number of elected councillors in the region but, when one
     considers that the overall cost of an elected council is a minimal part of a municipal budget, the argument
     becomes rather trivial.4
         The economic development argument is that a single, large local government is needed to compete
     effectively with other regions for investment and that a number of smaller governments, each with its own
     economic development program, simply cannot do as good a job. In the B.C. context, this argument
     seems to ignore the possibility that a regional district, a commission sponsored by local municipalities, a
     corporation created by a local municipality, or some other regional body could take on an economic
     development function and coordinate the various programs in the region. For example, Greater Victoria’s
     13 municipalities offer an intermunicipal business licence that is honoured in every jurisdiction.
         The economic development argument may also be founded on unrealistic expectations of what a local
     economic development initiative can accomplish. Manufacturers and other firms base location decisions
     on a number of factors over which a local government has little or no control. For example, a manufac-
     turer is more likely to locate in Greater Vancouver, with its relatively large local market and pool of
     labour, than in Greater Victoria.
         Amalgamation is not a panacea for solving local area problems. No major amalgamation of an urban
     area has resulted in lower costs. Where amalgamation appears to be beneficial, as was arguably the case
     in Abbotsford and Matsqui, the citizens of the municipalities made their own decision. This is the
     appropriate way to make such a decision.

     First Nations within municipal boundaries
     In 1988, there were 45 instances in which First Nations reserve lands were located within the boundaries
     of B.C. municipalities. Where properties in these reserve lands were leased to non-Indians, they were
     taxed by the municipalities and other B.C. taxation authorities on the same basis as off-reserve properties.
     British Columbia was the only province in Canada that uniformly taxed reserve properties on this basis—
     the prairie provinces and Ontario vacated the field in the 1970s, while such taxation was rare in Quebec
     and the Atlantic provinces.
          The complications inherent in the practice of including Indian reserve lands within municipal bounda-
     ries became increasingly apparent after the passage in 1990 of B.C.’s Indian Self Government Enabling
     Act, which harmonized provincial practices with the 1988 Indian Act amendments by requiring all B.C.
     taxing authorities, including municipalities, to cease taxing reserve properties when First Nations chose to
     exercise jurisdiction. This clarified that municipalities do not have jurisdiction over First Nations
     reserves, whether or not the reserve is by legal description geographically within municipal boundaries.
     This has led to many municipalities entering into agreements with First Nations to provide services to
     reserve lands in exchange for direct payment and, in some cases, First Nations have agreed to follow
     municipal bylaws or planning practices that were mutually beneficial.
          Another issue that has confronted many municipal and First Nation governments since 1993 also
     involves questions of jurisdiction, in this case over lands in traditional territories to which First Nations
     claim they are constitutionally entitled. As discussed in the appendix on First Nations, the questions are
     being addressed through treaty negotiations in which local governments play only an advisory role. In
     some cases, however, the land issue has been addressed through other means, especially in urban areas.


     4
           For example, a comparison of the costs of the 88 elected officials in the Capital Regional District Area with the costs of 23 elected officials
     in the newly amalgamated Halifax Regional Municipality serving the same total population indicated that costs in both areas were less than one-
     half of one percent of expenditures, at $4.59 and $4.55 per capita respectively (Bish 2001).
