                                                                                MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS             29


For example, some First Nation claims to ownership of traditional lands in Vancouver have been resolved
through financial settlements.


3.3     Municipal Functions and Expenditures
The earliest legislation for municipalities did not require the performance of particular functions and
permitted anything not otherwise illegal. Over time, the trends in provincial control increased to include
mandates, permissions, supervision of finances, and supervision of compliance with provincial legisla-
tion. These trends were arrested and ultimately reversed with the 1997 to 2000 reforms of the Municipal
Act (Local Government Act), and the enactment of the Community Charter in 2003. During this period of
legislative reform, municipal powers to function autonomously were considerably broadened. Nonethe-
less, some mandates have been legislated by ministries other than municipal affairs where there is deemed
to be a significant provincial interest.

Mandated functions
Mandates from the province to municipalities increased significantly after 1896, when they were first
required to assume responsibility for social welfare and some police functions. The provincial govern-
ment now takes responsibility for most social welfare functions, partly as a result of municipal financial
difficulties during the depression. Today, all municipalities construct and maintain local roads, do
emergency planning, engage an assistant to the provincial fire commissioner for fire inspection, and
appoint a subdivision approving officer. All municipalities over 5,000 population must provide policing.
     Provincial rules also prescribe how some activities must be organized. For example, a municipality
with its own police force must govern it through a police board, and libraries must be run by library
boards. The province also mandates procedures that must be followed in such activities as elections,
finance, planning, and zoning. Local governments are also required to include greenhouse gas emission
targets, policies, and actions in their official community plans and regional growth strategies.
     The dual role of the ministry responsible for municipalities, first in setting the rules under which local
government can function and secondly in mandating the performance of certain acts, has sometimes
presented a policy dilemma for local officials. For example, in 1982, a mandated 12-percent ceiling on
annual municipal expenditure increases was an ad hoc measure that interfered with local self-government.
It is not clear that a decision of this kind by a ministry is superior to decisions at the local level, where
adjustments to specific conditions can be made as long as other requirements for tax rate limits and debt
requirements are met.
     Generally, the more specific the mandate, the more difficult it is to make it fit appropriately into the
various policy frameworks and practices of the municipalities across the province. The 1997 to 2000
legislative reforms and the introduction of the Community Charter in 2003 considerably reduced the
likelihood of this kind of situation occurring in the future.

Voluntary functions
The range of voluntary functions performed by municipalities has expanded over time, usually by the
addition of new functions without abandonment of the old ones. One exception was permission to provide
aid to individual businesses, a function that was withdrawn after it was deemed to be susceptible to abuse.
     Exhibit 3–2 shows some of the most common voluntary functions. If finer distinctions were made,
200 to 300 functions could be identified under the old Municipal Act. Now, under the Community
Charter, municipalities have broad, general authority to provide any service that the council considers to
be necessary or desirable for all or part of its municipality, and the authority to regulate in broadly defined
spheres of authority.
