32       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA




     3.4     Municipal Governance
     Policy decisions in local government are made by the elected mayor and councillors, who together
     comprise the council, by members of boards, commissions, and committees, and by administrators within
     the scope of authority delegated to them by elected or appointed officials. Decisions are constrained by
     electors and potentially by auditors, the Inspector of Municipalities, the Ombudsman, the Information and
     Privacy Commissioner, and the courts. Decisions may also be influenced by local interest groups. Policy
     interdependencies in providing specific services are discussed in Chapters 6 through 9.

     Council
     The major policy decisions in a municipality are made by the elected council, which consists of the mayor
     and councillors. Cities, districts, villages, and towns may establish councils consisting of a mayor and
     four, six, eight, or ten councillors. Any reduction in number requires a vote by electors. For a city or
     district with a population of over 50,000, the council usually consists of a mayor and eight councillors,
     with a quorum being five. Other cities or districts usually have a mayor and six councillors, with a
     quorum of four. Towns and villages generally have a five-member council, with a quorum of three. Under
     its separate charter, Vancouver has an eleven-member council and requires a quorum of six.
          The council’s most important roles are the consideration and passage of municipal bylaws, financial
     planning and budget approval, appointment of regional district board representatives, appointment of
     administrative officials, and determination of the basic internal organization of the municipality. This may
     in turn require appointments of boards, commissions, committees, and additional municipal administra-
     tors.
          Normally, decisions are made by a simple majority of the councillors present at a meeting, although
     for some matters provincial legislation may require a two-thirds majority of councillors present. This is
     the case, for instance, when a council votes to terminate the employment of a municipal officer. Provin-
     cial legislation also provides that budget, expenditures, taxation, personnel appointments, and emergency
     powers must be dealt with by the council if a bylaw is required, and specifies the powers and duties of the
     mayor, councillors, and some appointed officers.
          A municipal council is a continuing body that speaks with one voice. It cannot be bound by the mayor
     or an individual member. Members are bound to act in good faith. They must participate in council
     meetings and they must not disclose confidential information. If, while holding office, a member has an
     indirect or direct financial interest in any matter connected with the municipality, he or she may not vote
     on the matter. As well, council members who have a direct or indirect financial interest in a matter may
     not use their office to influence decisions or use insider information. Gifts are either prohibited or subject
     to disclosure, and municipal contracts with council members or former members must be disclosed. If
     these ethical standards are breached, the council member may be disqualified. A council member may be
     held personally liable for unauthorized expenditures and may be subject to criminal prosecution for
     offences such as fraud or bribery. Unless malice is present, he or she will not normally be held personally
     liable for acts of the council, or for libel or slander allegedly committed at council meetings.
          The mayor is expected to exercise leadership but, except for some appointment and agenda-setting
     authority, he or she is for policymaking purposes just another member of council. This is often referred to
     as a “weak mayor” system, in contrast to a “strong” or executive mayor system, which is common in large
     municipalities in the United States. With a strong mayor system, the mayor proposes the budget, drafts
     bylaws, and hires and fires department heads. Council is the body that approves legislation but has no
     administrative role. Weak mayor systems are common in Canada and in those U.S. municipalities that use
     the city manager system. It would be unusual in the United States to use a weak mayor system for a city
     as large and diverse as Vancouver. In such large, heterogeneous cities in the United States, the mayor’s
