                                                                             MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS            33


office is often expected to be a major focus for policy setting. This is not the role of a mayor in a weak
mayor system.

Bylaws and resolutions
To be valid, all council decisions must be authorized by bylaw or resolution. If a council is required or
empowered by the Local Government Act or Community Charter to exercise a power by bylaw, it can
only do so by bylaw. Otherwise, it can exercise its powers by bylaw or resolution. A council must adopt a
procedure bylaw that specifies how it will adopt other bylaws, pass resolutions, and conduct its business
generally. It may also adopt a comprehensive single bylaw and call it a municipal code.
    A council must give a bylaw three readings before adoption. If assent is required from electors or if
approval is required from the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the minister, or the inspector of munici-
palities, then that assent must also be obtained before final adoption. Before 1997, the Municipal Act
required that a referendum to obtain elector assent be held for such bylaws as those authorizing long-term
borrowing for large capital projects. This requirement was substantially changed in 1997 to 2000 with the
introduction of a “counter-petition” process for obtaining elector approval, although some councils still
follow the older practice of referenda instead of counter-petitions as they are allowed to do.
    The counter-petition process states that the electors have to be explicitly advised that they have the
right to sign a counter-petition opposing a proposed bylaw. If at least five percent of electors signed the
petition, the council would have to submit the bylaw to a referendum if it still wished to adopt it. The
basic counter-petition procedure was retained in the Community Charter but it was renamed “alternative
approval process” and the petition requirement was increased from five to ten percent of the electors.
Citizens may also challenge bylaws in the courts under the Judicial Review Procedure Act, as described
in Chapter 2.

Budgets
For most bylaws, councils work at their own pace but, because the budgetary process is closely related to
annual assessment, taxation, and auditing requirements, and since new programs or program changes
usually require expenditures that must be budgeted in advance, the Community Charter requires
municipalities to make budgetary decisions on a regular annual cycle, generally as follows:
    • Before an annual property tax bylaw is adopted, a five-year financial plan that has been subject to
        a public consultation process must be adopted, setting out for each year a breakdown of projected
        expenditures (capital, debt service, other), revenues (property taxes, parcel taxes, fees and
        charges, borrowings, other), and transfers between funds (special funds, development cost charge
        funds, accumulated surplus). Financial plans must explicitly state the municipality’s objectives
        and policies regarding the proportion of revenue that comes from each funding source, the distri-
        bution of property taxes among the property classes, and the use of permissive tax exemptions.
    • An annual property tax bylaw must be adopted before May 15.
    • Audited financial statements for the preceding year must be submitted to the inspector of munici-
        palities by May 15.
    • An annual meeting to present the audited financial statements and a report on individual council-
        lor pay and expenses must be held by June 30.
    • Property taxes are due on July 2, unless one or more other dates are established by bylaw, in
        which case a property owner may elect to pay taxes either on July 2 or on the other dates.
Before 1999, the schedule was more tightly defined, with requirements to complete a provisional annual
budget by November 30, adopt it by January 31, complete a final budget by April 15 and adopt it by
May 15. In practice, most municipalities still follow this schedule. Budgeting considerations are further
discussed in Chapter 12.
