34       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     Appointed officers
     Several provincial acts specify appointed offices that must be filled by municipal councils. Until the
     Municipal Act was reformed, two required offices had always been “clerk” and “treasurer.” Now, the
     Community Charter requires a council to establish one office for “corporate administration” and one for
     “financial administration,” each with mandatory duties and powers specified in the Community Charter,
     plus any other duties and powers that the council may assign. The specific title is left up to the council,
     which may also appoint other officers.
         Under the Community Charter, a council may also appoint a “chief administrative officer” (previ-
     ously known as a “municipal manager” under the Municipal Act). In addition, provincial legislation
     requires that each council appoint a collector of taxes, an auditor, a chief election officer, and a deputy
     chief election officer. Except for the two election officers, who are discussed elsewhere in this chapter,
     the duties and powers of these officers include the following:
         • The chief administrative officer generally manages administrative operations, ensures that poli-
              cies and directions are implemented, and provides the council with advice and information on
              municipal operations and affairs.
         • The corporate officer prepares and preserves records and bylaws, administers oaths, and takes
              affidavits, declarations, and affirmations.
         • The financial officer receives and keeps all funds and securities, disburses funds according to
              bylaw, invests funds as allowed under provincial legislation, keeps accurate financial records and
              accounts, and supplies information as required by the inspector of municipalities.
         • The collector of taxes consults with BC Assessment to prepare the tax roll for general taxes and
              special assessments, manages the collection of taxes, and handles tax sales for delinquencies.
         • The auditor, who is not a direct employee of a municipality but is either a licensed accountant or
              is certified under the Business Corporations Act, audits the annual financial statements, and sub-
              mits a report to both the municipality and the inspector.
     A council may appoint the same person to more than one officer position. Thus, the chief administrative
     officer in a very small municipality might also have the duties and powers of a corporate officer (clerk),
     financial officer (treasurer), and tax collector. It is also possible for the same person to hold officer
     positions in two or more local governments. In the past, the villages of Salmo and Montrose have
     employed the same person as their chief administrative officer, and the Town of Fort Nelson and the
     Northern Rockies Regional District share some officers.
         Several other appointed officials mandated under other acts include:
         • under the Fire Services Act, a local assistant to the provincial fire commissioner who, in a mu-
              nicipality that has its own department, may be the fire chief or, in a municipality without a fire
              department, may be the mayor or another person appointed by the fire commissioner; and
         • under the Land Title Act, an approving officer for subdivisions.
     Larger municipalities may also appoint more officers to fulfil specific roles. Typical positions include
     those of police chief (appointed by a police board), fire chief, engineer, planner, building inspector, bylaw
     enforcement officer, solicitor, and recreation director. Among other officers, the Vancouver Charter
     requires the appointment of a chief licence inspector and a city electrician. Appointed officers normally
     have powers to exercise discretionary authority in policy decision making.

     Boards, commissions, and committees
     While basic municipal policies are established and passed into law only by the council, municipalities
     have the authority to delegate other decisions to boards, commissions, and committees as supplementary
     policymaking, operational, or administrative bodies. A few, such as boards of variance and police boards,
