                                                                                MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS             35


are mandated by provincial legislation and may have some independent policymaking authority, but most
are created by a municipal council, sometimes in cooperation with other organizations. Commonly
created boards, commissions, or committees include those that help to establish and implement policies in
the areas of planning, building design, heritage conservation, economic development, parks and recrea-
tion, the arts, museums, and libraries.
    The members of boards or commissions are sometimes determined by direct election, as is the case
with the Vancouver Board of Parks and Recreation, but this is not the usual practice. Most are usually
appointed by a council or in the case of standing committees of council, the mayor, but sometimes there
are other sponsors, such as community groups or other municipalities. Commissions or committees
sponsored by several organizations are ways to facilitate cooperation between municipalities and
community groups to achieve mutually beneficial objectives.
    Municipal boards, commissions, or committees usually include several council members plus some
interested citizens. In the case of select or standing committees, council members must be involved. The
use of appointed citizens permits closer supervision of administration than would be possible if the
members of small councils had to supervise everything, but it can also complicate the budgeting process
when a commission or committee recommends spending in its area of interest without considering the
needs of other municipal functions. Unfortunately, and understandably, this is often the case.
    Committees may also consist entirely of council members. A common practice is to meet in “commit-
tee of the whole” which permits the council to deal with complex issues in greater detail and less formally
than would be possible in a regular council meeting. Also common is the establishment of standing
committees to deal with specific functions, such as protective services, public works, finance, housing,
planning, and other functions. These committees usually play both policymaking and administrative roles.

Local interest groups
In making decisions, municipal councillors may seek advice from or may be lobbied by one or more
interest groups who have an interest in the decision, can provide knowledgeable advice, or both. Interest
groups in larger municipalities include the Chamber of Commerce or Board of Trade, the Urban
Development Institute, and various other business, cultural, sports, recreation, and neighbourhood groups.
Interest groups typically seek to influence policymaking with respect to issues specific to their areas of
concern, but they may also play a role in local elections.


3.5     Municipal Elections and Referenda
General municipal elections in B.C. are held every three years at the same time as elections for school
boards and regional district directors from electoral areas. The Local Government Act provides that
election costs can be shared among one or more local governments so that, for example, a municipality
and a school board could agree on joint election arrangements.
    The detailed steps for nominations and elections are shown in Exhibit 3–4, which shows their applica-
tion to the 2008 elections, with relevant sections of the Act in parentheses. All eligible voters are qualified
to be nominated for election, except judges, employees of the municipality or the regional district of
which the municipality is a member (unless they take a formal leave of absence), and people who are
disqualified for other specified reasons, such as having voted as a councillor for an illegal expenditure.
    Council members are normally elected at large but a municipality may pass a bylaw, subject to the
approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, providing that all or some members be elected by
neighbourhood constituencies. Nanaimo had a ward system from about 1974 to 1984 and Vancouver had
one until 1936, when a switch was made to at-large elections following a plebiscite. An attempt to return
to wards was debated and rejected by the provincial private bills committee early in 1982. In 1982 and
