38       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     Referenda
     Referenda are of two types. One type is required when the approval of the electors must be obtained
     before a bylaw can be adopted. Before 1998, some referenda for electors’ assent were simply required,
     such as for large capital projects. Now, the Community Charter provides for an “alternative approval
     process” whereby a referendum must only be held if the council wishes to adopt the bylaw and more than
     10 percent of the electors have formally opposed it. Referenda are still mandatory in such cases as
     eliminating a park or selling a water system.
         The other type of referendum is often called a plebiscite. The Local Government Act used to require
     that the question posed in a plebiscite be one that a council is empowered to deal with, but this provision
     was broadly interpreted. For instance, a referendum on nuclear disarmament was allowed on the grounds
     that nuclear weapons could possibly result in municipal devastation and a council has a role in making
     representations to other levels of government concerning public safety. Now, the Community Charter
     simply says that a council may seek community opinion through a nonbinding vote or other process on a
     question that it believes may affect the municipality.


     3.6     Examples of Municipal Organization
     Until 1998, provincial legislation only recognized two basic forms of administrative organization: a
     council committee system and a municipal manager system. A council committee system typically
     consists of a number of standing committees whose inputs to council are coordinated by the mayor, who
     serves as both the chief executive officer and the chief operational administrator. In a city manager
     system, the mayor and council are supposed to concern themselves primarily with broader policy matters,
     such as the board of a business corporation, while administration is handled by the city manager who
     directs department heads and other employees.
          Both systems were used in B.C. but the two types of organization were difficult to distinguish in
     practice. Where there was a council committee system, the clerk or another principal appointed officer
     tended to assume responsibility for many of the mayor’s administrative duties and ended up performing
     much as a manager would. Where there was a city manager system, council committees continued to be
     maintained and elected officials still became involved in administrative matters. The provisions regarding
     a municipal manager system were deleted from legislation in 1998.
          Although it formally eliminated the statutory office of municipal manager in formally adopted city
     manager systems, legislative reform in 1998 actually provided B.C. municipalities with a broader range of
     organizational options because it made the rules more flexible and conferred broader powers to imple-
     ment them. In many respects the reform recognized that, in practice, B.C. municipalities had simply
     adapted the two available options to suit their own purposes and preferences, resulting in a variety of
     organizational arrangements.
          To perform the various functions required of them, larger municipalities typically organize them-
     selves into departments whose names reflect the functions for which they are responsible—
     administration, finance, personnel, fire, police, engineering, public works, planning, parks and recreation,
     etc. Smaller municipalities may eschew formal departmental structures, but may simply denote functional
     responsibilities in job titles and descriptions. The range of possibilities and practices is illustrated in the
     following brief descriptions of the Town of Sidney, the District of North Cowichan, the City of Burnaby,
     and the City of Victoria. Similar information is available on the websites of many B.C. municipalities.

     Town of Sidney
     Sidney was incorporated as a village in 1952 and became a town in 1967. Its area is 714 hectares and its
     estimated population in 2006 was 11,525. In 2007, its mayor and six councillors operated both as a
