                                                                                MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS          39


council and as a committee of the whole. On a regional basis, the council is represented on the Vancouver
Island Regional Library Board, Peninsula Water and Waste Water Commission, Peninsula Recreation
Commission, Peninsula Emergency Measures, Greater Victoria Labour Relations Association, and
Capital Regional District Board. The town’s appointed officers in 2007 included a chief administrative
officer/corporate administrator, a financial administrator who was also the tax collector, and a director of
development services.
    Sidney had a series of advisory committees comprised of local citizens, including an Advisory Plan-
ning Commission, an Advisory Committee for Persons with Disabilities, a Police Advisory Committee, a
Youth and Community Advisory Committee, and a Vision Coordination Committee. The latter committee
was formed to help coordinate implementation of a municipal corporate strategy that had evolved from a
1998–99 community vision statement developed by a citizen committee with significant public input.
    Sidney’s organizational system has changed somewhat since 1990, when it had a council committee
structure with two major committees: one responsible for finance, administration, and policing, the other
for works, services, parks, and recreation. At that time, the town clerk served as the central administrator
and the elected officials were heavily involved in administrative as well as policymaking activities. By
1999, the main focus of council was on policymaking, assisted by citizens serving voluntarily on advisory
committees.

District of North Cowichan
The Corporation of the District of North Cowichan was incorporated in 1873. Its area is 20,433 hectares
and its estimated population in 2006 was 27,557. It is typical of mixed urban-rural municipal districts in
the province, with concentrations of people in the south end adjacent to the City of Duncan, and in the
communities of Chemainus, Crofton, and Maple Bay. It is governed by a mayor and six councillors who
appoint a number of advisory and other internal committees, as indicated in Exhibit 3–5. One or more
councillors served on most committees, which also included citizen volunteers, district staff, or both.




    EXHIBIT 3–5:       NORTH COWICHAN INTERNAL COMMITTEES IN 2005

                Administration and Finance             Harbours Commission
                Advisory Planning                      Joint Utilities Board
                Agricultural Advisory                  Parks and Recreation Commission
                Board of Variance                      Protective Services
                Environmental Advisory                 Public Works
                Forestry Advisory                      Technical Planning




External committees to which North Cowichan councillors, staff, or both were appointed include the 2010
Olympic Committee, BC Forest Discovery Centre, Vancouver Island Regional Library Board, Chemainus
Festival of Murals Society, Chemainus & District Chamber of Commerce, Cowichan Centre Commission,
Cowichan Valley Regional District Board, Cowichan Valley Regional District Women’s Safety Commit-
tee, Crofton Community Centre Society, Duncan-Cowichan Chamber of Commerce, Mid-Island Treaty
Advisory Committee, Pioneer Park Complex Committee, Regional Policing Integration Review Commit-
tee, Somenos Marsh Wildlife Society, Trans Canada Trail Steering Committee, and Tourism Vancouver
Island Board.
