40       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



         The district’s appointed officers in 2007 included a chief administrative officer who was also the
     approving officer, a director of administration, a director of finance, a director of engineering and
     operations, a director of planning, and several department heads managing large departments. North
     Cowichan is bigger in geographic size and population than Sidney, has more internal committees, more
     appointments to external committees, and more appointed officers with specialized duties.

     City of Burnaby
     Burnaby is the third most populous municipality in B.C. It was incorporated in 1892 as a district
     municipality, like most other lower Fraser Valley municipalities, and became a city in 1992. Its area is
     10,674 hectares and its 2006 population was 205,477. It is governed by a mayor and eight councillors.
     Because it adopted a strong city manager system in 1957, the council is not divided into committees to
     exercise administrative supervision over departments. The council does, however, appoint each member
     to serve as a liaison with an administrative department and, as indicated in the organization chart in
     Exhibit 3–6, it also appoints a number of internal advisory committees and other bodies.
          The internal committees appointed by the council typically include one or more council members,
     citizen volunteers, support staff and, sometimes, representatives of other bodies, such as the school
     district. Exceptions in 2005 included the Advisory Planning Commission and Board of Variance, which
     had no councillors on them (the Local Government Act prohibits councillor membership), and the
     Executive, Housing, Economic Development Strategy, Simon Fraser Liaison, and Finance and Civic
     Development committees, all of which were composed entirely of council members. Burnaby council
     members were also appointed to such external bodies as the Greater Vancouver Regional District Board,
     GVRD Parks Committee, Greater Vancouver Regional Labour Relations Bureau, District Community
     School Advisory and Coordinating Committee, Lower Mainland Treaty Advisory Committee, Burnaby
     Board of Trade, Tourism Burnaby, New Vista Society, and the Local Court of Revision, on which all
     council members served.
          As the organization chart indicates, Burnaby’s appointed officers in 2005 included the city manager, a
     deputy city manager, and more than 25 others appointed to the position of departmental director, assistant
     director, or equivalent. The city administration was organized in seven departments: engineering; finance;
     corporate services; planning and building; parks, recreation and cultural services; fire; and police (an
     RCMP municipal unit). In addition, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the Burnaby Public
     Library Board were relatively autonomous executive bodies whose delegated administrative powers
     included authority to spend money, incur liabilities, and select contractors within the parameters of
     budgets approved by the council.
          Historically, a large proportion of Burnaby council meeting time has been devoted to environmental,
     traffic safety, planning, and zoning matters. These are areas of direct concern to many citizens and those
     with which councillors are most likely to be familiar because of their participation in related committees.
     In other matters, the elected officials have tended to rely heavily on information and recommendations
     provided to them by the city manager and his/her staff.

     City of Victoria
     The Corporation of the City of Victoria was incorporated in 1862 as the capital of the colony of Vancou-
     ver Island. It became the capital of the merged Colony of British Columbia in 1866 and the Province of
     British Columbia in 1871. Its area is a relatively small 2,335 hectares and its estimated population in 2003
     was 76,387. It is governed by a mayor and eight councillors and although it was one of the few munici-
     palities in the province that adopted the city manager form of government by referendum, its practices
     have historically resembled those of a council committee system more than a city manager system like
     Burnaby’s.
