                                                                                               REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS                       45




    Chapter Four
Regional District Governments


U
          ntil the creation of regional districts in 1965, there was no form of general local government
          outside municipal boundaries in British Columbia. Where local services were desired by citizens
          in non-municipal areas, the available options were improvement districts of various kinds, water
users’ communities, direct provincial provision, or incorporation into municipal status. With the creation
of regional districts, a flexible form of general local government became available throughout the
province.
     Regional districts may provide services to residents in parts of unincorporated areas, in areas com-
prised of both municipalities and parts of unincorporated areas, for two or more municipalities, for their
entire region, or in adjacent regional districts. The elected officials representing the service area govern
the service and the residents and businesses located within the area pay the costs. Regional districts also
serve as regional governments for activities mandated by the provincial government.
     More recently, regional districts have attracted the international interest of scholars of local govern-
ance because they resolve the most intractable problem in local governance: how to create institutional
arrangements with boundaries for different public goods and services that are preferred by citizens in
different geographic areas or that possess different production characteristics. Thus regional districts need
to be understood as an important step in the evolution of a system of local governance suitable to a
province with as much diversity as British Columbia, and as an approach to organizing local government
that is of international interest. Their primary governing legislation is the Local Government Act.

4.1        History and Structure
British Columbia was divided into 29 regional district areas in 1965. All of the original regional districts
in the province, except the Stikine area in northwestern B.C., were incorporated within the three-year
period following the passage of regional district legislation in 1965. Peace River-Liard was disincorpo-
rated in 1987 and replaced by the newly incorporated Peace River and Fort Nelson-Liard (now Northern
Rockies) regional districts. The Central Fraser Valley, Dewdney-Alouette, and Fraser-Cheam regional
districts were disincorporated in 1995 when they merged to form the Fraser Valley Regional District. In
2008 the Comox-Strathcona Regional District was split into the Comox Valley and Strathcona regional
districts.6 Stikine remains unincorporated.7
     The letters patent for each regional district include:
     • its name, boundaries, constituent municipalities, constituent electoral areas and the boundaries of
         the electoral areas (these are the unincorporated areas from which board members are elected);


6
     The map of regional districts in Exhibit 4–2 has not been updated to show the split because the data in Exhibit 4–1 are for 2006.

7
     Bill 43 Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment Act (No.2), 2008 provides enabling authority for the cabinet to incorporate a new, single-tier
municipality to cover the area currently covered by the Northern Rockies Regional District. The amendments enable the dissolution of the Town
of Fort Nelson and the regional district and will allow the cabinet to have the new municipality take on certain regional district functions and
obligations, as there would be no regional district. This would be the only area where a municipality exists without a regional district.
