                                                                                            REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS                        51


Functional distribution of expenditures
Even though regional districts perform many different functions, their expenditures can be grouped in
relatively few categories, as indicated in Exhibit 4–5. Because the overall figures are strongly influenced
by those for the Greater Vancouver Regional District,9 the GVRD figures are tabulated separately.
     Overall, in 2006, the GVRD spent about $191 per capita while the other 26 regional districts spent an
average of $267, ranging from lows of $108 in Kitimat-Stikine, $131 in Skeena-Queen Charlotte and
$134 in Thompson-Nicola, to highs of $607 in Kootenay-Boundary, $762 in Sunshine Coast, and $1,536
in Northern Rockies. The per capita expenditures of the others were between $142 (Bulkley-Nechako)
and $422 (North Okanagan).
     Some of the differences in spending between the GVRD and other regional districts can be explained
because most of the GVRD consists of municipalities which predate the creation of the GVRD and are of
sufficient size to perform most local government activities on their own.
     • The GVRD general government expenditure did not include general administrative costs related
         to the water, sewer, solid waste, and housing functions. General government typically constitutes
         about 10 to 12 percent of a regional district’s budget.
     • Protective services include fire protection and building inspection, both of which are provided by
         municipalities and some regional districts, including limited services provided by the GVRD to
         its electoral areas. Regional districts do not provide police services, although the Police Act does
         include a conditional provision for a regional district to do so.
     • In 2006, most regional districts reported no spending in the category of health, social services,
         and housing. GVRD spending in these areas, which includes social housing, accounted for over
         95 percent of the total spent by all regional districts combined.
     • Development services include local planning and land use control, which are relatively important
         activities for some regional districts with extensive unincorporated territories but are less impor-
         tant for a regional district like the GVRD that consists mostly of municipalities. The GVRD
         provided some development services to its one electoral area but they were not separately re-
         ported and were presumably included within the “general government” category.
     • The GVRD did not provide transportation and transit services in 2006 because these services
         were provided by TransLink, a separate regional transportation authority.
     • Expenditures on parks, recreation, and culture can be relatively substantial, especially if a re-
         gional district provides major recreation facilities and programs, such as sports centres, golf
         courses, or regional parks, which was the main activity of the GVRD in this category in 2006. It
         is often the case, however, that much of the expenditure on recreation programs is recovered
         through user fees.
     • Water and sewer expenditures tend to be relatively high in the GVRD because both services
         involve extensive capital installations, as they do in other heavily populated areas, with associated
         annual costs of operation, maintenance, and debt service. In less densely populated areas, water
         may be provided by individual wells, water users’ communities, improvement districts, or re-
         gional districts, and liquid waste may be largely handled by septic tank systems.
Many of these differences can be explained by the fact that some services provided by GVRD municipali-
ties, such as fire protection, building inspection, and recreational facilities, are provided by regional
districts in less densely populated areas.



9
    The Greater Vancouver Regional District has branded itself “Metro Vancouver” but it is referred to in law and in statistics as the Greater
Vancouver Regional District, or GVRD.
