                                                                                              REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS                          53


costs are simply shared in relation to the property tax base10 but different cost-sharing rules may be
formulated and included in the bylaw that establishes a particular service activity. These rules are referred
to as “custom agreements.”
     Custom agreements are used to relate voting strength more closely to the use of a service and to fi-
nancial contributions, which usually go together. Custom agreements can also create a committee or
commission to govern the activity and the agreement may provide for committee or commission members
who are not directors. For example, cost-sharing formulas within custom agreements in one regional
district include:
     • 50 percent converted assessed value and 50 percent population for a theater and an arena;
     • the number of cases during the previous year for permitting and regulation of soil deposit and
          removal;
     • 1/3 converted assessed value, 1/6 land area, 1/6 population, and 1/3 high- and medium-priority
          discharges in the previous year for stormwater quality management; and
     • population for 911 emergency service.
In another regional district, the number of members of the committee to oversee water supply is based on
the previous year’s water consumption in the different areas.
    In general, custom agreements tend to bring governance and financial contributions closer to benefits
for either individual users or member municipalities. Some regional districts make more use of these
agreements than others.


4.3        Regional District Governance

The board
All regional districts have the same basic governing structure. The governing board is composed of
directly elected members from electoral areas and elected municipal officials appointed to the board by
their municipal councils. The way the board is constituted and the voting requirements under which
decisions are made provides for representation on the basis of both population and area. There are also
special provisions for First Nations representation but a First Nation representative may or may not be a
voting member on most issues.
     The total number of board members and their voting weights are determined by the voting unit popu-
lation established for each regional district. The number of votes a municipality or electoral area is
entitled to is calculated by dividing the voting unit into the population of the municipality or electoral
area, with the result rounded to the next whole number. Thus, if the voting unit is 3,000, a municipality of
17,000 people would have six votes and an electoral area of 2,000 people would have one vote. In 2006,
the voting units in B.C.’s regional districts ranged from 150 in Northern Rockies to 20,000 in Greater
Vancouver, with most units being in the 2,000 to 5,000 range.
     After the voting strength for each municipality and electoral area is calculated, the number of direc-
tors is determined by dividing the voting strength of the municipality or electoral area by five (or by
another number specified in the letters patent), with one director appointed or elected for each five votes
or fraction thereof. Thus, as indicated in Exhibit 4–6, each board member may possess between one and
five votes. It is not unusual for a municipally appointed member to have four or five votes while an
elected member may have only one or two votes because electoral area populations are usually smaller.

10
     Two measures of assessed property value are available. One is simply the total assessed value of all properties. The other, called “converted
value of land and improvements,” assigns weights to different classes of property according to tax rate differentials, thus normally weighting
nonresidential properties more heavily than residential.
