                                                                       REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS             55


    •   TFN participation in regional district services is the same as for municipalities, meaning they may
        participate in the current region-wide services that apply to all members and have access to other
        regional district services on a voluntary basis, depending on the terms of the treaty.
    •   Regional district membership rules apply to First Nations members as they do to other members
        (e.g., voting rights, provisions for participating in or withdrawing from services, etc.).
    •   The TFN must appoint an elected TFN government official as its director on the regional district
        board. The director must meet the same requirements as all directors regarding such matters as
        conflict of interest and disqualification rules.
The amendments to the Local Government Act provide for some customization in the few instances in
which the requirements of the local government system would inappropriately interfere with the
independent authority of the TFN or would not fit within a First Nation context. For example, the TFN
would participate in regional district region-wide borrowing through the Municipal Finance Authority but
would access local borrowing through the First Nations Financing Authority.

Bylaws
Like a municipality, a regional district board must adopt a procedure bylaw that specifies how it will pass
resolutions, adopt other bylaws, and conduct its business generally. A bylaw regarding a financial plan,
borrowing, a real estate transaction, authorization of liabilities, authorization of a contract, or the
administration or operation of a service must be adopted by a weighted vote of all directors or, with
respect to an area service, of the directors representing the electors who pay for the service. Any other
bylaw or resolution is adopted by an unweighted, simple majority vote.
    A bylaw establishing a new service, including any proposal to borrow money to finance it, must be
approved in a referendum of the electors who would receive the service, with the following exceptions:
    • A municipal council may give consent on behalf of its electors, if the proposed participating
         service area is the entire municipality.
    • An electoral area director or, if the director refuses to do so, the board, may give consent on be-
         half of the electors (1) for a service that would be provided to an entire electoral area without
         borrowing or (2) if at least half of the owners of parcels representing at least half the net taxable
         value of land and improvements in the area to be served have submitted a petition for a service.
    • For a water, sewerage, or waste management service, or for any service that would cost not more
         than 50 cents per $1,000 of the net taxable value of land and improvements in the service area,
         the assent of the electors may be obtained through an alternative approval (counter-petition) proc-
         ess whereby, if more than 10 percent of the affected electors sign a counter-petition opposing the
         bylaw, a referendum must be held if the board still wishes to adopt it.
The bylaw must be adopted after three readings by an unweighted majority of the board members who
vote on it. All bylaws establishing new area services must be approved by the inspector of municipalities.

Financial plans
The budgetary process in regional districts is more complex than it is in municipalities. Since various
functions are performed for various service areas, the regional district must calculate the exact expendi-
ture on each service in each area, together with whatever tax and other revenue will be used to finance it.
These calculations permit elected officials and citizens to compare the costs and benefits of the various
services to a degree that is not possible in the municipal budgetary process.
     The regional district budget schedule requires that a provisional budget be adopted by December 31
and a final five-year budget plan adopted by March 31. Since a regional district’s taxes are collected on
its behalf by municipal and provincial tax collectors, it must submit requisitions for funds by April 10 to
