56       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     each municipality and, for the electoral areas, to the provincial surveyor of taxes who levies the necessary
     electoral area taxes, collects them and forwards the funds to the regional district. The municipalities must
     pay the requisitioned funds by August 1.

     Appointed officers
     A regional district board must appoint “corporate” and “financial” administrative officers whose
     mandatory duties are essentially the same as those of the former regional district secretary and treasurer,
     whose titular positions were abolished in 1998. It must also appoint an auditor, a chief election officer,
     and a deputy chief election officer. The board may appoint a chief administrator and other officers, may
     appoint the same person to more than one office, and may determine the specific title of any office.

     Boards, commissions and committees
     Like municipalities, regional districts have broad powers to use boards, commissions, and committees to
     assist in policymaking, administration, and the delivery of services. Where a regional district has adopted
     a planning or zoning bylaw, it must also establish one or more boards of variance with three members on
     each board. An electoral area that is actively involved in community planning and voluntary activities
     normally has an advisory planning commission that may also discuss potential voluntary activities for the
     area. For some other matters, a director may appoint a committee of citizens, usually three, to provide
     advice, supervision, or both.
          An electoral area advisory planning commission is made up of citizens appointed by the regional
     board upon the recommendation of the regional director for the area. Each commission serves a single
     electoral area and gives advice on planning and land use matters to the board. The commission allows for
     citizen participation in local planning, which complements the public hearings called to review changes in
     plans or zoning regulations. An advisory planning commission is usually representative of the citizens in
     an area. It would lose credibility if its recommendations to adopt or to change planning or zoning
     regulations were strongly opposed by a majority of residents.

     Local community commissions
     Since 1987, regional districts have been empowered to establish elected local community commissions
     for small settlements in unincorporated areas. Five such commissions had been created by 2008—Bear
     Lake (Regional District of Fraser-Fort George), Charlie Lake (Peace River), Coal Harbour (Mount
     Waddington), Fort Fraser (Bulkley-Nechako), and Olalla (Okanagan-Similkameen).
         A local community commission is created by a regional district bylaw, subject to a local referendum
     and approval by the inspector of municipalities. The commission consists of the regional director for the
     electoral area plus four members who live in the community and are elected by its residents. Administra-
     tive support is provided by regional district staff both generally and (where provided) for such functions
     as sewerage, water supply, or garbage collection, with the costs financed by local property taxes. The
     potential to create local community commissions supported by regional district administrative services is
     one of several flexible institutional arrangements, including improvement districts and water users’
     communities, that can be used to provide services to small areas in rural British Columbia.

     Local community groups
     In addition to appointed boards, commissions, and committees, a variety of voluntary organizations, such
     as neighbourhood associations and community clubs (formerly called ratepayers associations in rural
     areas), often serve as forums for discussion within regional districts. Because the areas involved often
     have small populations, many of the meetings of these groups resemble old-fashioned town meetings
     where issues are discussed by a large proportion of the community.
