                                                                        REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS             57


Elections and referenda
The Local Government Act provisions for elections in the electoral areas of regional districts are
essentially the same as the provisions for municipalities. General elections for regional board directors are
held every three years, at the same time as municipal elections. A possible exception is the election of a
local community commission, which could be held each year at a time specified in the bylaw. Electoral
area members of regional district boards are subject to the same accountability measures as municipal
councillors.
    As with municipalities, referenda in regional districts are of two types. Some are required, such as a
proposal to borrow money for a major capital expenditure or the adoption of a bylaw that has been
opposed by a successful alternative approval (counter-petition) process. Others, including plebiscites on
questions regarding existing or possible services can be held at the discretion of the board, typically at the
same time as the triennial general elections.


4.4     Examples of Regional District Organization
There is considerable variety in the structure and function of regional districts, just as with municipalities.
Brief examinations of the Greater Vancouver and the former Comox-Strathcona regional districts
illustrate this diversity.

Greater Vancouver Regional District or “Metro Vancouver”
The Greater Vancouver Regional District (GVRD) was incorporated as the Regional District of Fraser-
Burrard in 1967. The GVRD named itself Metro Vancouver in 2007, though there were no structural or
functional impacts associated with the name change. In an area of 2,932 square kilometres, it contains
over half of the province’s population in 21 municipalities and one electoral area. Eleven of the 19
municipalities in B.C. that had populations over 50,000 in 2003 are in the GVRD, including (in approxi-
mate order of population size, beginning with the largest) Vancouver, Surrey, Burnaby, Richmond,
Coquitlam, Delta, Langley Township, the District of North Vancouver, Maple Ridge, New Westminster,
and Port Coquitlam. The 10 other GVRD municipalities are the City of North Vancouver, West Vancou-
ver, Langley City, Port Moody, White Rock, Pitt Meadows, Lions Bay, Anmore, Belcarra, and Bowen
Island. The GVRD’s single electoral area includes the University Endowment Lands and a large area
containing Barnston Island, Passage Island, and the sparsely populated territories along Indian Arm,
Howe Sound, and the west side of Pitt Lake. More than 99 percent of the GVRD population lives in
municipalities.
    Because most of the population is served by municipalities, the GVRD has undertaken comparatively
few functions other than for the region as a whole. In 2008, its regional responsibilities included liquid
waste collection and treatment, water supply and distribution, parks, social housing, air quality manage-
ment, solid waste management, transportation planning, strategic planning, 9-1-1, a Global Positioning
System (GPS) information service, and labour relations for municipal employees. Building inspection,
land use planning, dog control, emergency telephone, fire regulation, fire protection, library, mosquito
control, noise control, recreation programming, community parks, and soil removal regulation services
were provided for the electoral area.
    The GVRD is unusual in that it comprises four separate legal entities—the Greater Vancouver Sewer-
age and Drainage District (GVSDD), Greater Vancouver Water District (GVWD), Greater Vancouver
Housing Corporation (GVHC), and the GVRD itself. All share a common administrative staff and each
has virtually the same board of directors. The GVSDD was created in 1956 to succeed the 42-year-old
Joint Sewerage and Drainage Board and the GVWD was created in 1926. They were merged into the
GVRD structure in 1971 and each was serving 18 municipalities by 1991. In addition, the Vancouver
