58        LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     Fraser Parks District, created in 1966, was fully incorporated into the GVRD structure in 1971, with the
     unusual arrangement that the non-GVRD municipalities of the City of Langley, Township of Langley,
     Matsqui, Maple Ridge, and Pitt Meadows (which were members of the park district) continued their
     participation. Since then, the Langleys, Maple Ridge, and Pitt Meadows have joined the GVRD and
     Matsqui has amalgamated with Abbotsford, which still participates in the parks service and is represented
     on the board for that function.
          The GVRD plays only an indirect role in providing transit and transportation planning services in the
     Lower Mainland. TransLink, the regional transportation authority established in 1998–99, must consider
     regional land use objectives and consult with the GVRD on TransLink’s long-range transportation plan.
          GVRD policy is determined at monthly meetings of the board and committees. Because of its large
     population, the voting unit for representation on the board is 20,000, far greater than for other regional
     districts. Even with this large voting unit, the 2008 board consisted of thirty-six members with a total of
     124 weighted votes. Uniquely, all votes are weighted. Vancouver had six members with 29 votes, Surrey
     had four with 20 votes, Burnaby had three with 11 votes, Richmond had two with 9 votes and Coquitlam
     had two with 6 votes. The remaining municipalities had one member with 1 to 5 votes each and the
     electoral area had one member with 1 vote. Board committees in 2008 included aboriginal relations, land
     use and planning, Sustainable Region Initiative, intergovernmental, finance, housing, labour relations,
     parks, environment and energy, waste management, and water.
          The administrative structure of the GVRD in 2008 included a chief administrator’s office and 12
     other departments with approximately 1,000 full-time and 800 seasonal employees. Some departments
     have operational responsibilities (engineering and construction, operations and maintenance, policy and
     planning, housing, regional parks) and some provide support services (corporate services, corporate
     secretary, finance, and administration). The human resources and labour relations departments had both
     operational and support responsibilities.
          Regional cooperation through the creation of special-purpose organizations governed by representa-
     tives from member municipalities has a long history in the lower Fraser Valley. The creation of the
     GVRD in 1967 was very much an evolution of traditional regionalism in the most urbanized area of the
     province.

     Regional District of Comox-Strathcona (RDCS)
     The Regional District of Comox-Strathcona (RDCS) was the first in the province to be incorporated. Its
     area was 20,298 square kilometres and it extended from the west coast of central Vancouver Island to the
     southwest edge of the Cariboo Regional District, including part of central Vancouver Island, Johnstone
     Strait, the northern part of Georgia Strait, and Bute Inlet. Within this area were nine electoral areas, in
     which about 31,700 people lived in 2004, and the municipalities of Campbell River, Comox, Courtenay,
     Cumberland, Gold River, Sayward, Tahsis, and Zeballos, whose combined population was about 65,000.
     The electoral area population has historically been concentrated in the Comox Valley and Campbell River
     areas, with lesser concentrations on the west coast and on Denman, Hornby, Quadra, and Cortes Islands.
         The RDCS voting unit is 2,500 persons. In 2004, the twenty-member board included nine electoral
     area directors and eleven from municipalities, with 31 of the 47 weighted votes held by municipal
     directors and 16 held by electoral area directors.11
         The diverse geographic scope of the RDCS and the large number of activities to be dealt with at
     monthly meetings has forced it to create an extensive system of committees, some to supervise specific

     11
          In 1990, when there were 10 electoral areas and the combined municipal population was close to that in the electoral areas, the RDCS was
     one of the few regional districts where the number of electoral area directors (10) exceeded the number from municipalities (9), although the
     municipal directors held one more of the 37 weighted votes than the electoral area directors.
