                                                                       REGIONAL DISTRICT GOVERNMENTS             61


4.5      Observations on Regional District Governments
In the relatively brief existence of regional districts, a number of studies of their performance have been
done over the years, often resulting in legislative change. For example, evidence of serious conflicts
between regional and municipal governments with respect to planning policies and procedures led to the
abolition of regional planning in 1983. That same year, regional board voting rules were changed to
reduce the dominance of municipal representatives in land use decision making for unincorporated areas.
In 1989 and 1995, the regional district role in planning was partially restored, as discussed in Chapter 10.
     In 1999, a major study was undertaken to identify and propose potential improvements in the opera-
tions and governance of regional districts (Bish 1999c). It included analyses of each major regional
district role (a non-municipal government, a forum for intermunicipal service cooperation, and a regional
government), municipal-electoral area relations, fringe area issues, relationships with First Nations,
visibility, accountability, and dispute resolution. The study process led to substantial legislative changes
in Bill 14, the Local Government Statutes Amendment Act, 2000, including:
     • authorization to exercise broad service powers and make more flexible service arrangements, as
          discussed in Section 4.2;
     • requirements for five-year financial planning and updating financial operations, essentially paral-
          lel to municipal requirements;
     • elimination of an annual term restriction for appointment of municipal directors;
     • authorization for more cost-recovery flexibility, including electoral-area-only feasibility study
          funds, general recovery of electoral area administration service costs from all electoral areas, and
          general authority to impose fees and charges in relation to services;
     • provision for increased flexibility with respect to agreements by which municipalities share only
          some of the costs of planning and land use for electoral areas, including changing the voting enti-
          tlement for such agreements; and
     • authorization for a dispute resolution process regarding services.
The study recommendations also addressed a number of “best practice” issues that did not require
legislative change.
    Note that regional districts were not covered by the Community Charter changes. While there are
advocates for a “Regional District Charter,” regional districts continue to be a unique forum for coopera-
tion followed by governance, not an organization that can take precedence over its member
municipalities.
    The regional district system in B.C. is a very important institutional innovation with an unusual com-
bination of attributes.12 On one hand, they are a practical solution for providing local institutions to
provide local services within an extremely large and diverse province. On the other, they have attracted
international interest because of their flexibility to create institutional arrangements for local people to
deal with the many different kinds of local government activities. It is important to understand some of
the unique assumptions and philosophies that underlie this innovation.

Local knowledge
An important characteristic of the regional district system is an implicit assumption that local representa-
tives know their own situation best and that, given this forum for cooperation, they will undertake
activities for mutual benefit. It places perhaps more faith in citizens and locally elected officials than
some might consider prudent but given the diversity in local service conditions there does not seem to be

12
     This discussion is largely drawn from Bish 2004.
