62       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     any reasonable alternative—it is probably the best we can do. It does, after all, provide a practical solution
     to the problem of how to deal with varying service area boundaries and provides a practical example of
     possible improvement for those concerned with polycentric political systems elsewhere.

     Cooperation then government
     Perhaps their most important attribute is that regional districts provide a systematic, authoritative, cost-
     effective framework for facilitating cooperation among local governments to provide services on a variety
     of scales and achieve relatively high levels of fiscal equivalence in the process. They can adjust bounda-
     ries to achieve scale economies in production and/or to match new demands for services from groups in
     areas whose boundaries differ from those of existing local governments, depending on what is most
     beneficial for a particular service. The choice is a local one and local people are most likely to make the
     right tradeoffs to resolve incompatibilities and make decisions in a relatively cost-efficient manner. The
     flexibility with which a regional district can create and manage services is truly extraordinary in a North
     American context. However, once agreements are reached they are implemented by a real government
     with powers of coercion and taxation in the exercise of its jurisdiction over activities that its members
     have agreed to assign to it. The fact that the activities have been agreed upon by members makes a
     regional district very different from a second-tier government to which a provincial or state government
     has assigned jurisdiction in a relatively uniform way across its territory.

     Replacing local-regional conflict with cooperation
     A closely related outcome of the way regional district boards are constituted is that they do not engender
     the kind of inefficient competition and rivalry that tends to arise in a two-tier government system in which
     one group of elected politicians governs at the local municipal level and another group governs at the
     regional level. Virtually all major local government functions include some activities that are best
     provided at a local level and others that are best provided at a regional level. If responsibility for a whole
     function is assigned to one level, there will always be activities more appropriately provided at the other
     level. With regional districts, the same elected officials are responsible for the functions, regardless of the
     level at which the activities are provided or produced, and are in relatively good position to decide how
     best to provide and produce them. In short, the fact that a regional district’s member municipalities
     appoint their directors helps to reduce the competition and tension that marks the relationship between
     local and regional governments in other jurisdictions. This “bottom up” approach substitutes cooperation
     among local units, each of which has its own vision, for a stronger regional vision.
         The analysis of conflict between local units and regional governments in two-tier systems was first
     made in Ontario by Andrew Sancton (1994) and is directly relevant to recommendations made for the
     Greater Vancouver Regional District. The GVRD, in which more than two million people live in twenty-
     one municipalities and one electoral area, has been a prominent focus of calls for the direct election of all
     regional directors. For example, the 1998 study of municipal electoral accountability included a recom-
     mendation for establishing a Greater Vancouver Authority governed by a directly elected Greater
     Vancouver Assembly and a regional mayor elected across the whole region (Smith and Stewart 1998).
     The recommendation was to “ensure more democratic, representative, and accountable regional structures
     in Greater Vancouver,” to develop “an accountability system more in line with current comparative
     practice,” and to “allow the main metropolitan region to play a much more recognizable role in global
     terms.” No consideration was given to the conflicts generated in Ontario’s two-tier system, which led to
     the elimination of the several municipalities in favour of single regional governments.
         The arguments for switching to an elected GVRD board are unpersuasive, whether they are based on
     philosophical precepts of democracy and accountability like those mentioned above, or simply being
     advanced by an interest group advocating something they feel should be implemented regionally but
