                                                                             OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS              65




 Chapter Five
Other Local Governments


B
         ritish Columbia’s local government system has changed over time. It began with municipalities
         and school districts but there was no all-encompassing form of local government, such as a
         county, until regional districts were created in 1965–68. Before this, several kinds of local
governments provided services for local concentrations of residents, including improvement districts and
regional library districts. Even after regional districts were created there continued to be a need for
alternatives to resolve specific issues, resulting in the formation of regional hospital districts, the Sechelt
Indian Government District, the Islands Trust, and the South Coast British Columbia Transportation
Authority (TransLink).
     All of these local governments are governed by locally elected officials and have a direct, indirect, or
conditional power to levy or requisition property taxes. There are also water users’ communities, local
areas, and local community commissions, which govern local services but have no direct property-
taxation powers. With the exception of local community commissions, which are described in Chapter 4,
the most important features of these governments are described in this chapter.
     Also providing local services are aboriginal governments, which are either under federal jurisdiction
or have been created by treaties. They include band councils, tribal councils, and treaty-established
governments like the Nisga’a Lisims government. While aboriginal governments are beyond the scope of
this book, it is useful for readers to have a fuller understanding of the different kinds of aboriginal
governments and how modern treaties are changing their relationships with other governments. The
appendix provides a description of these organizations and their relationships to other governments.
     This chapter describes the most important features of other local governments.


5.1     School Districts
Public school districts in B.C. provide education to students from kindergarten to grade 12 (K–12).
School districts may also provide other services, such as adult continuing education. The many independ-
ent schools in the province are governed by their own boards and are partially financed by public funds if
they meet specific provincial standards. Total spending on K–12 education is about 85 percent of total
spent by the all municipalities in the province.
    The first schools in British Columbia were created in 1849 by the Hudson’s Bay Company but an
attempt to systematically provide schools in all areas did not begin until after Confederation with Canada.
In 1872, the new provincial government passed the Public Schools Act and assumed responsibility for all
public schools. Administration was centralized in Victoria, and the Provincial Board of Education was
created in 1879. At that time, a tradition of local school districts was initiated.
    Local trustees were appointed or elected wherever there were 20 or more students. Since then, educa-
tion has evolved as a joint provincial and local function. While local boards of education have discretion
in some areas, provincial regulations govern the election of trustees, appointment of statutory officials,
curriculum requirements, class size, and financial matters. The education ministry has assumed financing
of school districts to the point where virtually all financing is in the form of provincial grants and boards
of education no longer have a general power to tax property. They do have a conditional power to levy
