68       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     School district governance and organization
     School districts (boards of education) are governed by trustees who are elected every three years at the
     same time as elections for municipal councillors and regional district directors from electoral areas. The
     election of trustees is similar to the procedures for municipal councillors except the chair is not separately
     elected, as mayors are. The number of trustees per board of education is three, five, seven, or nine. School
     districts with larger enrollments generally have more trustees.
          Boards of education set local education policies and supervise the administration of public schools.
     Under the School Act, trustees must appoint a district superintendent, who acts as chief administrator, and
     a secretary-treasurer who is responsible for official and financial records. All school districts must appoint
     an auditor and must provide public health services for students, in accordance with the orders of the
     minister.
          Like municipalities and regional districts, school districts work to a budget and audit cycle. Each
     district is required to prepare an annual budget and a detailed report on enrollments for the minister to
     review and approve in accordance with a prescribed schedule. There is also a schedule for the submission
     of audit reports by the auditor to the board and the minister.
          The participation of school trustees on municipal, regional, and joint committees, boards, and com-
     missions is determined by the individual school district. Many trustees are members of committees and
     commissions that advise on recreation, planning, children’s social services, and traffic. Some school
     districts also enter into agreements with other organizations to share school facilities. For example, the
     Sooke School District and the Juan de Fuca Parks and Recreation Commission have had a longstanding
     agreement to share the use of each other’s facilities.

     School district finance
     In 2007–08, B.C. school district expenditures were about $5.64 billion, including $4.85 billion for
     operations, $237 million for school capital plan projects, and $550 million spent by the ministry on debt
     service and other capital items. The average expenditure, including operations, debt service, and other
     capital items, was almost $9,700 per pupil, or approximately $1,250 per capita province-wide. The
     average per pupil block operating grant funding amount was $7,850.
         Other details of school finance are presented in Chapter 12. Here it is sufficient to note that the minis-
     try uses a formula to provide funds for school districts each year. What is listed on property tax bills as
     school taxes are essentially provincial government property taxes that go into the provincial general fund
     and have no relationship to the funding a school district receives.


     5.2     Improvement Districts
     An improvement district is a specially incorporated, limited-purpose local government that undertakes
     one or more local services. The first improvement districts were created in the Okanagan Valley in the
     1920s under the Water Act, for which the environment ministry was responsible. However, the legislation
     was so broad that districts were created for many purposes ranging far beyond water supply. Conse-
     quently, in 1956 the municipal affairs ministry assumed responsibility for the improvement districts that
     provided fire protection, and for all others in 1979.
         British Columbia citizens living in unincorporated areas outside municipalities relied primarily on
     improvement districts to provide local public services until 1965–1968, when regional districts were
     created. The total number of improvement districts continued to increase until 1987, when there were 328,
     after which the numbers declined as some were incorporated as municipalities, replaced by municipal
     extensions, or replaced by regional district service areas. Now, the ministry’s policy encourages their
     dissolution and discourages new incorporations, but there were still 234 improvement districts active in
