                                                                            OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS             71


households by 2006. In 2005, the system consisted of two pumping stations, approximately 10 kilometres
of water lines, and two reservoirs, one built in 1995, the other in 2005.
     The district is governed by three trustees elected for staggered three-year terms at the annual meeting.
District staff include an administrator and three certified water distribution operators, one of whom serves
as principal operator. Sources of revenue include parcel taxes, consumption tolls, connection charges,
capital expenditure charges, and miscellaneous service charges.
     In response to concerns about the quality and volume of the water supplied by the district, a water-
shed risk assessment was undertaken in 2003. It was determined that Kemp Lake is highly susceptible to
contamination that affects the potability of the water and that increasing urbanization of the watershed
will further degrade water quality. As a result, the district has undertaken investigations of alternatives,
including the possibility of connecting to the area’s regional system.
     When it was first established, the Kemp Lake Waterworks District was considered to be about four
miles from the unincorporated area of Sooke. Now it abuts the northwestern boundary of the District of
Sooke and is part of the unincorporated Otter Point community, which voted against becoming part of the
District of Sooke by a substantial majority in a 2005 referendum. Several property owners within the
Kemp Lake Waterworks District subsequently applied to have their properties annexed by the District of
Sooke. Their applications were accepted, along with similar applications made by property owners in
other unincorporated areas adjacent to Sooke, but the authorizing bylaw was successfully opposed by
some Sooke citizens through the alternative approval (counter-petition) process. A referendum of Sooke
citizens was therefore held on November 19, 2005, in conjunction with municipal elections, and the
voters approved the annexation. In 2007 the district received an infrastructure grant to determine the
feasibility of connecting the Kemp Lake system to the regional system that serves Sooke.

South East Kelowna Irrigation District
During the late 1800s and early 1900s, land development companies installed waterworks and irrigation
systems in many parts of the Okanagan. Many companies wanted to divest themselves of their systems as
land was sold. In 1920, the assets and waterworks of two land companies were consolidated to become
the South East Kelowna Irrigation District, which is one of the larger such districts in the Okanagan,
comprising an area of more than 3,600 hectares (36 square kilometres). In 2004, the district provided
water services to almost 2,300 hectares of grade-A irrigated land and over 1,900 residential units. It is
estimated that the demand for service will increase by another 100 hectares of irrigated land and 400
residential units by 2014.
     Operations are financed primarily by metered consumption charges, domestic water flat-rate service
charges, and annual water taxes on all properties with water rights in the district. Capital works related to
system expansion, estimated to cost about $2.5 million from 2004–14, are financed primarily by capital
expense charges levied on applicants for new service. Financing for some of the district system has also
been provided by joint federal-provincial-local agricultural and rural development cost-sharing programs,
including $4 million for capital improvement and expansion in 1970.
     The district is governed by five trustees elected for staggered three-year terms at the annual meeting.
It is operated by an eight-member staff, including a general manager, secretary-treasurer, secretary-
receptionist, general foreman, water distribution operator, equipment operator, pipe layer, and meter
reader. While it has a simple management structure, the district’s substantial geographic area and its need
for large volumes of water for irrigation bring it into contact with a variety of provincial agencies. Its
bylaws and finances are supervised by the municipal affairs ministry, and it works closely with the
agriculture ministry for the development of irrigated agricultural lands. A regional health authority
monitors domestic water quality, the forests ministry is concerned with the management of timber
harvesting to minimize the impacts of logging practices on water supplies, and the environment ministry
