                                                                                                     OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS                        73


     Regional hospital districts are governed by boards of directors, usually the same directors who govern
the regional district. The RHD directors typically devote less than an hour a month to an RHD meeting,
usually either before or after a regional district board meeting. Individuals wishing to address issues
regarding their RHD may do so at RHD meetings, provided they follow appropriate procedures.
     In areas serving larger populations, RHDs used to do extensive, long-range capital improvement
planning, but only the Capital RHD now employs staff dedicated to this purpose. Planning for capital
improvements is now largely done by the regional health authorities with RHDs providing up to 40
percent of the capital cost of a project. Other capital funding is provided by the health ministry through a
regional health authority, by own-source funding from a regional health authority, and by hospital
foundations. The Greater Vancouver Regional District no longer has an RHD. The health ministry may
fund up to 100 percent of the capital cost of health facility projects through the Fraser and/or Vancouver
Coastal health authorities.
     When the system to govern health services in B.C. was extensively reformed in 1993–97, it was
initially intended that the RHDs would be absorbed by new regional health governments. This idea was
ultimately discarded when it was concluded that a body with local taxation authority should be governed
by locally elected politicians, not by provincially appointed regional health board members. Furthermore,
regional district board members were emphatic about the importance of their role as RHD directors,
although they also expressed frustration with their minimal role in planning and decision making for
projects that their constituents helped finance through property taxes.
     Regional hospital districts reported financial information to, and sought approval for individual capi-
tal borrowing from, the health ministry on a regular basis until 2003, when the Hospital District Act was
amended to remove requirements for ministerial approval of RHD annual budgets and capital project
plans.14 Removal of health ministry approvals has given RHDs greater independence. They are aligning
their financial processes more closely to those of regional districts and MFA requirements.


5.4        Regional Library Districts
Libraries are provided by municipal and regional district library boards and by regional library districts
(RLDs). Regional library districts were created under the Library Act to allow for libraries to have unique
service areas consisting of two or more municipalities and two or more regional districts representing one
or more electoral areas. Not all the municipalities within the regional districts need to be members. Three
RLDs have been created in B.C.: the Fraser Valley RLD, which served more than 660,000 people in
thirteen municipalities and two regional districts in 2006; the Vancouver Island RLD, which served more
than 417,000 people in twenty-eight municipalities and nine regional districts; and the Okanagan RLD,
which served more than 350,000 people in seventeen municipalities and four regional districts. Their
largest source of funding is from property taxes levied within their service area.
     An RLD is governed by a board whose members are appointed annually by the participating local
governments from among their own elected members. The board’s powers and duties include policymak-
ing, budget-setting, appointing committees, property transactions, contracting for services, borrowing
money, and generally managing the district. The board must appoint a chief librarian to supervise and
direct the district and staff, serve as secretary to the board, and perform other assigned duties. Each year,



14
     RHDs are still required to submit their budgets to the ministry, but not for approval. The ministry simply advises each board of the current
year net taxable value of all land and improvements within its jurisdiction. A requirement for RHDs to prepare and submit annual financial
reports in accordance with the Financial Information Act was also eliminated in 2003. Thus, neither the Public Accounts nor health ministry
reports contain consolidated summary information about RHD financial activities any longer. The last year for which summary RHD information
was included in the Public Accounts was 2001.
