74       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     the board must submit a report to the minister and an audited financial statement to each participating
     government.
          Board decisions on expenditures are made by a weighted vote in which each board member has one
     vote for the first 1,000 population the member represents, plus one additional vote for each additional
     1,000 people. Costs are shared according to a formula in which half is based on population and half on
     converted assessed value. The board can decide to have other voting or cost-sharing formulas but must do
     so by a two-thirds vote. The annual budget must show the share of the cost to be paid by each participat-
     ing local government and a copy must be provided to each participant before March 1. Each participating
     government then pays its share in four equal installments, commencing March 1.
          RLDs have served an important role in providing library services in B.C., especially to citizens in
     some rural areas. Before 1994, appointments to RLD boards were made by municipalities and school
     districts rather than regional districts, and the appointees were not necessarily elected councillors or
     trustees. This was unusual because the boards had budgetary authority but no direct financial accountabil-
     ity to citizens through an electoral process. There were instances of considerable tension arising within an
     RLD when the percentage increase in requisitioned library funds was considered by some member
     governments to be excessive relative to other priorities in their communities. This appears to have been
     one reason why several municipalities left the Vancouver Island RLD in 1996–97 and joined the Greater
     Victoria Public Library, which is jointly provided by the participating municipalities but does not operate
     as an RLD.
          The information technologies libraries use and make available to their citizens are undergoing
     changes. There is likely to be greater emphasis on cooperation among libraries and greater support for
     smaller libraries, especially those serving rural areas, so they can make the same information sources
     available to their citizens as are available in larger libraries.


     5.5     The Islands Trust
     The waters between Vancouver Island and the mainland of British Columbia contain many islands with
     sizable residential communities but, until Bowen Island was incorporated in 1999, there were no
     municipalities south of Cormorant Island, where the Village of Alert Bay is located. Before regional
     districts were created in 1965, improvement districts were the only form of local government on the
     islands although voluntary associations, including ratepayers associations, often provided local services.
          After 1965, when regional districts began planning and zoning for the islands, disputes arose between
     the islanders and the regional districts. This happened in part because most individual islands were not
     designated as separate electoral areas with their own regional director, and they had relatively little voting
     power when board decisions were made. For example, in 1986, Denman and Hornby islands in the
     Regional District of Comox-Strathcona were in an electoral area whose population was more than three
     times that of the two islands. The electoral area director, who was likely to be a non-island resident, had
     one out of nineteen unweighted votes on the board and three out of thirty-seven weighted votes. As a
     result, most regional districts did not have strong policy inputs from island residents and did not devote
     much attention to island concerns.
          In recognition of the inherent weakness regional districts had in addressing island planning issues,
     and in acknowledgement of the special planning needs of island environments, the provincial government
     passed the Islands Trust Act in 1974. The Trust area encompasses more than 450 islands and 5,000 square
     kilometres in Howe Sound, Haro Strait, and Georgia Strait, from the Canada-U.S. border in the south to
     Lasqueti, Denman, and Hornby islands in the north. Texada Island and islands further north are not
     included.
