76        LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     Governance
     For the purposes of governance, the Islands Trust is divided into fourteen areas: one for an area that has
     no major islands, one for the Bowen Island municipality, and twelve local trust areas for the major islands
     or groups of islands. Each of the twelve local trust areas has a local trust committee and elects two
     trustees to the trust council for three-year terms. In addition, two trustees represent the municipality of
     Bowen Island and two members of the executive committee represent the area with no major islands.15
         There is also a separate trust fund board, composed of three trustees elected by the trust council and
     up to three members appointed by the minister. The trust fund board accepts, acquires, and manages land,
     easements, covenants, and money in order to preserve places of natural significance or cultural value
     within the trust area.
         The trust council, which meets at least four times a year, establishes general policies and is responsi-
     ble for managing finances other than the trust fund. It appoints staff, adopts an annual budget, appoints an
     auditor, submits an annual report to the minister, and from among its own members, elects an executive
     committee and standing committees for local planning, trust programs, and financial planning. The
     executive committee, consisting of a chair and three vice-chairs, does the daily business of the trust,
     approves all bylaws prepared by local trust committees, acts as a committee for the thirteenth local trust
     area, and performs other duties as directed by the council.
         Each of the twelve area trust committees, composed of the two local trustees and a member of the
     executive committee, is responsible for preparing and adopting bylaws for its area with respect to
     community planning, land use regulation, subdivision control, and soil deposit and removal regulation.
     Should the executive committee refuse to approve a bylaw, the local trust committee may refer it to the
     trust council for approval. To assist it, each local trust committee appoints an advisory planning commis-
     sion, and several have also appointed advisory design panels. Each local trust area with a land use bylaw
     has a board of variance which, in some cases, is shared among several areas.
         Funding of the Islands Trust includes a provincial contribution, in recognition of the province-wide
     importance of the islands, and local property taxes collected on behalf of the trust by the provincial tax
     collector. Total revenues in 2006 were $4.6 million, including revenues from property taxes (87% of the
     total), provincial grants (7%), fees and sales of services (3%), and interest and other sources (3%). Total
     expenditures were $4.4 million, including expenditures on local services (70% of the total), council
     services (20%), and trust fund services (10%).


     5.6        Sechelt Indian Government District
     The Sechelt Indian Government and Sechelt Indian Government District (SIGD), located on the Sunshine
     Coast near the municipality of Sechelt, were established in 1986–87 under the federal Sechelt Indian
     Band Self-Government Act and the provincial Sechelt Indian Government District Enabling Act. The
     SIGD is a member of the Union of British Columbia Municipalities, and functions much like any B.C.
     municipality with respect to the registration of land titles, property tax assessments, and homeowner
     grants. However, the elected council of the SIGD can choose to undertake its local government activities
     as either a B.C. Indian government district or as an Indian government under federal legislation. Since
     voting for the council is restricted to members of the First Nation, the district is required to have an
     elected advisory council to represent non-aboriginal people who live within its jurisdiction.
         In 2006, the district’s population was estimated to be 844 and its government spent a net total of
     $915,896 ($1,085 per capita). This included expenditures on general government (30.9%); transportation

     15
            In November 2008, the Islands Trust is holding a referendum on Salt Spring island asking whether they would like to increase the size of
     their local trust committee by two members.
