                                                                             OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS             77


and transit (27.4%); parks, recreation, and culture (15.3%); solid waste management (12.2%); sewer
services (6.1%); protective services (5.3%); and water services (2.8%).
    In 1990, the provincial government passed the Indian Self Government Enabling Act, which included
an option for forming other Indian government districts in B.C. No other Indian government districts have
been established.


5.7 South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority (TransLink)
TransLink, the South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority (formerly the Greater Vancouver
Transportation Authority) was created in 1998–99 in response to a longstanding demand for local control
over regional transit and transportation planning. The agency’s mandate is to plan, fund, build, and
market an integrated transportation system that supports the “livable region” goals stated in the regional
growth strategy for the Greater Vancouver Regional District (GVRD).
    Until 2007, TransLink was governed by a fifteen-member board of directors, with twelve members
appointed by the GVRD from among the region’s locally elected officials and three appointed by the
provincial government, which had left the three positions vacant. Under the 2008 South Coast British
Columbia Transportation Authority Act, a new governing structure was introduced and provision was
made for allowing expansion of the transportation service area to include municipalities or parts of
regional districts that wish to be served by TransLink.

Governance
TransLink’s governing structure includes:
    • a mayors’ council on regional transportation, consisting of the mayors from all municipalities in
       the transportation service area, that appoints the other governing officials, approves budgets and
       some plans, generally oversees the governance of the authority, and meets at least four times a
       year;
    • a board of directors consisting of nine qualified people appointed by the mayors’ council on the
       advice of a screening panel; and
    • a regional transportation commissioner who is appointed by the mayors’ council, reports to the
       council annually on TransLink performance, and oversees and/or reviews fare changes, other cus-
       tomer service issues, the sale of facilities or assets, and the financial feasibility of certain plans.
TransLink functions independently of the GVRD, although consultation with the regional district is
required on certain matters, such as increased borrowing limits and the long-range transportation plan.
    The board of directors supervises the management of the affairs of the authority and has several statu-
tory responsibilities, including appointing and supervising the chief executive officer. The directors are
appointed for staggered three-year terms through a process in which a five-person screening panel
annually identifies at least five qualified individuals for the consideration of the mayors’ council. The
members of the screening panel include one person appointed by each of the transportation minister, the
mayors’ council, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of British Columbia, the Vancouver Board of
Trade, and the Greater Vancouver Gateway Society.

Functions and budget
TransLink’s functional responsibilities include:
    • preparing long- (30-year) and medium-range regional transportation plans;
    • provision of a major regional road network and bicycle path system in cooperation with local
       municipalities, that continue to own the roads and paths;
