78       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



         •   transit services, including buses, community shuttles, the SeaBus across Burrard Inlet, the Sky-
             Train mass transit system, the West Coast Express commuter rail service between Vancouver and
             Mission, the Albion ferry across the Fraser River, and a HandyDART service for the disabled;
         •   transportation demand management services, such as van, car pooling, ride matching, and educa-
             tional services aimed at encouraging people to make “green choices”;
         •   AirCare vehicle emission monitoring service for Greater Vancouver;
         •   project management services for major projects (e.g., Canada Line rapid transit line, Golden Ears
             bridge between Langley and Maple Ridge-Pitt Meadows);
         •   “intelligent transportation system” services to improve the efficiency of roads and transit (e.g.,
             satellite vehicle monitoring, traffic signal priority systems, tolling technologies);
         •   administration of service contracts with subsidiary companies and contractors;
         •   management of capital projects; and
         •   financial planning and management.
     The administrative, planning, road network, and path system services are delivered by TransLink staff.
     Most other services are delivered by TransLink subsidiary companies, except for the community shuttle,
     HandyDART, and transportation demand management services, which are delivered by private contrac-
     tors, and the West Vancouver bus system, which the municipality has operated for many years. In 2005,
     TransLink introduced its own police service staffed by 93 officers, the first of its kind in Canada, to
     enforce transit rules and senior government laws on and around its property.
          TransLink’s budget has increased significantly since its inception, from about $325 million in the first
     year to $1.265 billion in 2007. Sources of funds in 2007 included property, fuel, and electricity tax
     revenues (45% of the total); transit fare and AirCare revenues (27%); senior government grants (26%);
     and interest income. A total of $862.6 million was spent on operational activities and most of the
     remainder was allocated to a capital fund. About $4 billion in major capital projects was managed by
     TransLink in 2007, including two rapid transit lines, new and rehabilitated bridges, major road works, and
     transit vehicle acquisitions.
          In support of public safety in its transportation services, the provincial government has established the
     South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Police Service (SCBCTAPS). These officers can
     enforce all Criminal Code of Canada infractions in British Columbia. While they focus their efforts on
     SkyTrain, they also support safety and security programs at Coast Mountain Bus Company, SeaBus, West
     Coast Express, and transit stations in the region. SCBCTAPS is fully integrated into the regional police
     communications system and responds to emergencies outside of TransLink properties as would any
     municipal police force. SCBCTAPS is the only urban transit police force in Canada where police have
     full peace officer status.


     5.8     Other Small Local Government Bodies
     In addition to the special-purpose local governments discussed above, there are several other kinds of
     small local governments in B.C. They include water users’ communities, local areas, and the local
     community commissions described in Chapter 4. While they do not exercise property-taxing authority,
     water users’ communities can levy assessments on their members and the provincial government levies
     the property taxes to finance local areas.

     Water users’ communities
     Water users’ communities are incorporated under the Water Act and administered by the environment
     ministry. They provide a legal organization to coordinate and manage the delivery of water to groups of
