                                                                            OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS             79


six or more water users. There were approximately 107 water users’ communities in B.C. in 2008. Some
have existed for more than 75 years.
    Water users’ communities are like improvement districts but there are no elected trustees. Each has a
manager, the first of whom is appointed by the comptroller of water rights. Subsequent managers are
elected or otherwise chosen by members of the community. All policies are decided by votes of the
membership and voting interests are proportioned by the area of land irrigated and/or the volume of water
delivered. Sources of funds include user charges and assessments based upon a member's interest in the
community.
    Water users’ communities tend to be small, serving more than six but generally fewer than twenty
users. Most are run informally with voluntary labour, and assessments are generally made only for the
purchase of materials. An assessment roll may be prepared and, if it is, it must be filed with the comptrol-
ler of water rights. Some communities skip this procedure unless there is likely to be a dispute over
payment.

Local areas
A local area, established under the Local Services Act, is an area within which a particular service is
provided by the provincial government, for which specific property taxes are levied on the area residents.
No formal provision is made for locally elected officials or local political participation. On this basis, a
local area may be regarded as an area of decentralized provincial government service rather than a local
government.
    A local area may be created by the Lieutenant Governor in Council in any unincorporated area for a
variety of purposes, including community planning, land use regulation, zoning, subdivision control,
public comfort stations, home nursing care, garbage collection and disposal, ambulance service, fire
protection, recreation, and homes for senior citizens. The municipal affairs ministry possesses the same
authority as a municipal council for community planning and other land use control in local areas.
Administration may also be assigned to other ministries where appropriate. Within a local area, the
ministry may make regulations to give effect to the local area’s purposes, such as to establish to commu-
nity planning areas.
    In 2008, the authorities under the Local Services Act were used for four areas in B.C. Atlin and
Dease Lake are responsible for community planning. Both of these communities are located in the
northwestern corner of the province and neither was located within an incorporated regional district until
2007, when Dease Lake was put into the Kitimat-Stikine Regional District. As a result, there are plans to
dissolve the Dease Lake local area and have the regional district continue the service. The other two local
areas are located near Quesnel and Williams Lake and are responsible for fire protection. While the
nearby municipalities are responsible for actually producing the fire protection service to these areas
outside of their boundaries, the province is responsible for collecting the taxes and remitting it to the two
municipalities.


5.9     Observations on Other Local Governments
The various local governments discussed in this chapter demonstrate the flexibility and evolution of the
B.C. local governance system. While municipalities and school districts were created at about the same
time as the provincial government, around 1870, most of the territory was unsettled and no general unit of
government such as a county was developed. The small concentrations of people in rural areas relied on
improvement districts for local services if they were too few to form a municipality. With increasing
population and the need for cooperation among municipalities in urban areas, regional districts were
created to provide services to rural areas and be forums for intermunicipal cooperation.
