                                                                                       SERVICE DELIVERY         81




 Chapter Six
Service Delivery


T
         he preceding chapters have been largely devoted to discussions of the various local governments
         in British Columbia, the functions they perform, and the policy frameworks within which they
         make decisions. Almost all of the decisions, other than those related to regulation, have to do with
providing public goods and services, including whether or not to provide a service, how much to spend on
it, and how to fund the expenditure. Collectively, these can be defined as service provision decisions.
     When a local government makes a decision to provide a good or service, it must also consider how it
will be produced or delivered, for example, whether it will be done by government staff or contracted to
another producer. In other words, there must also be service production decisions. These production and
delivery decisions, and the considerations that bear on them, are discussed in this chapter.
     Citizens, council members, and administrators are also interested in how well their government per-
forms. The Community Charter requires municipalities to provide their citizens with annual progress
reports on performance. Some municipalities were engaged in performance evaluation before it was
required. As of 2008, regional districts were not yet required to do so.
     The main approaches to performance measurement and evaluation are described in this chapter. Per-
formance measures for specific functions and services are presented in Chapters 7, 8, and 9. The
provision frameworks and production arrangements for them are also examined.


6.1     Economies of Scope and Scale
An important consideration in deciding how to produce a public service is whether or not it possesses
economies of scope or scale. Economies of scope are cost savings that accrue because two or more
activities are produced simultaneously. For example, a small police department may keep its building
open 24 hours a day by having the dispatcher respond to citizens who appear in person at night. The
dispatcher provides both dispatch and counter service during low-use hours. This is likely to be cheaper
than having dispatching transferred to a larger organization and then hiring someone to be available at the
counter at night. Such interdependency among activities provides opportunities for economies of scope in
producing local government services.
    Economies of scale exist when the average cost of each unit of a good or service decreases as the
quantity produced increases. Economies of scale often exist where a service involves a substantial capital
investment, such as a water supply system, and the average cost decreases as the capital costs are spread
over the larger output associated with an increase in the use of the service. It is also possible to have
diseconomies of scale, where the average cost increases with an increase in service production because of
the difficulty or complexity of managing the larger organization associated with the increased production.
Police patrol is an activity subject to diseconomies of scale because the costs of supervising policing, with
its difficult-to-measure and face-to-face contact with citizens, requires a disproportionate increase in
managerial and supervisory resources as the size of the patrol organization increases.
    A full understanding of economies of scale in local government services requires an appreciation of
the nature of the service being supplied and of the demand for the service in its market area. For example,
an activity such as homicide investigation may not have economies of scale in terms of the number of
