82       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     homicides investigated but it does require a large population to generate enough homicides to keep a
     homicide investigation squad busy. For local government services, the size of the population served and
     the per capita cost of the service are usually the most important considerations in assessing the economies
     of scale in a service.
          There is no direct relationship between economies of scale and the size of the organization that can
     efficiently produce the service. For example, a DNA laboratory may require a minimum staff of 10 people
     yet serve a population of several million or more. In contrast, police patrol services may require one
     police officer for every 700 people and, as the population increases, the size of the police patrol organiza-
     tion must also increase. The DNA laboratory activity possesses economies of scale; the police patrol
     activity does not.
          The scope and scale characteristics of a service are not the only considerations in deciding how to
     produce or deliver it. Local government decision makers who wish to deliver public goods and services
     efficiently soon discover that the organizational and administrative arrangements appropriate to one kind
     of public activity may not work as well for another, because public goods and services and their modes of
     production have diverse characteristics.


     6.2     Characteristics of Services
     Four characteristics that are important to consider in determining the most effective methods for
     delivering public goods and services are:
         • the measurability of inputs and results,
         • the labour- or capital-intensiveness of production,
         • the degree of face-to-face interaction between the service deliverers and the citizens involved in
             the process, and
         • whether the good or service is delivered continuously or only occasionally.
     These characteristics have a bearing on the ease with which production can be managed. A service that is
     capital intensive, impersonal, and continuous with measurable outputs is less difficult to manage. A
     labour-intensive, face-to-face, and occasional service with immeasurable outputs is more difficult to
     manage.




      EXHIBIT 6–1:       DIFFICULTY OF EFFICIENT PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY


                      Less Difficult                                     More Difficult


                      Measurable Outputs                                 Immeasurable Outputs
                      Capital Intensive                                  Labour Intensive
                      Impersonal                                         Face-to-Face delivery
                      Continuous                                         Occasional




     The more characteristics of the production and delivery of an activity that are less difficult, the easier it is
     to manage production and delivery of the service. Likewise, the more characteristics that are more
     difficult, the less easy it is to manage production and delivery. Different activities will have different
     mixes of these characteristics.
