                                                                                      SERVICE DELIVERY         83


Measurability of inputs and results
The more precisely service inputs and results can be measured, the simpler it is to evaluate the perform-
ance of production process. For example, one can measure the number of gallons of effluent treated by
different-sized sewage treatment plants or the number of gallons passed through a water system, which
makes it easy to compare the resulting outputs to various input combinations and determine the most
efficient mode of production.
     Some results cannot be easily measured. For example, the results associated with police officers or
land use planners are multidimensional and difficult to quantify. Police patrols have the objectives of
creating safe streets, deterring criminal activities, apprehending criminals, and assisting citizens with
problems, such as asking neighbours to cease their noisy activities. There is no simple quantitative
method that can be used to compare the various ways of delivering police patrol services. Whether
delivered by an officer on foot, a one-person patrol car or a two-person patrol car, the immeasurability of
the output makes the management task relatively difficult.
     The measurability criterion can help determine the most economically efficient size and type of serv-
ice delivery organization. Where results can be easily measured, the organization can be managed
efficiently by looking at input-output relationships and concentrating management efforts in problem
areas. Where the results are difficult to measure, the organization must be managed by regulating the
behaviour of the employees. More supervisors and administrators are needed as the size of the organiza-
tion increases and the number of people supervising others can grow disproportionately. Output per
person declines and the cost per unit of output increases. Thus, the efficient size of a service delivery
organization for which the results are hard to measure tends to be relatively small.

Labour- or capital-intensiveness
Services tend to be either labour intensive or capital intensive. Where large capital investments are made
and a service is capital intensive, the average cost per unit of output declines as output increases because
the fixed cost of capital is spread over a larger number of units and the population served by the one
organization can be relatively large. However, the importance of labour in producing the activity
increases, so does the number of employees needed for any given level of output. The increasing cost of
managing larger numbers of employees means that smaller organizations serving relatively small
populations are more efficient when production is labour intensive, since this avoids the higher costs of
supervising more people. In general, managing employees is more difficult and costly than monitoring the
performance of machinery or other capital equipment.

Face-to-face interaction
When services are delivered face to face, for example, by teachers to students, or police officers to
citizens, the quality of the services depends on the personal interactions between the deliverers and the
recipients. The management of processes is difficult because supervisors cannot always observe the
behaviour of their employees. In contrast, when there is no personal interaction between producer and
consumer, as is the case with impersonal services like highway construction, water supply, and garbage
collection, employees can be managed without concern for their interactions with recipients. In general,
where face-to-face service delivery is involved, smaller organizations are more easily managed and more
efficient.

Continuous or occasional production
Many local government services, such as garbage collection, police patrol, and water supply, are
delivered on a continuous or regular basis. Others, such as a homicide investigation, re-sodding a playing
field, cleaning a sewer line, or building a new facility, are needed or delivered more occasionally. In
