84       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     general, it is easier to manage regular services than occasional ones, especially where the occasional
     service requires a specialized work force or specialized capital equipment. If a local government does not
     need such a work force or specialized equipment all the time, it is more efficient to have other organiza-
     tions provide those services. For example, most governments rely on contracts with private firms for
     occasionally required engineering or construction projects, and a police department may rely on contrac-
     tual or joint arrangements with other departments or the provincial police when homicide investigations
     are needed.

     Interrelationships and differences among service characteristics
     These four service characteristics can be conceptualized independently but they all interact with one
     another. Where face-to-face service delivery exists, it is likely to be labour intensive and relatively
     difficult to measure. Where capital-intensive production exists, the output is likely to be measurable and
     impersonal. Thus, it should not be surprising to find that labour-intensive, face-to-face, hard-to-measure
     services, such as police patrol or classroom education, are most efficiently delivered to relatively small
     groups of recipients by relatively small or highly decentralized organizations. Capital-intensive, measur-
     able, impersonal services, such as water supply or sewage treatment, possess economies of scale and are
     efficiently provided by organizations serving large numbers of people. In addition, occasionally needed
     services may be most efficiently obtained from specialist producers, some delivering impersonal services
     and others delivering face-to-face services for a number of local government clients.
          One of the problems in organizing for service production in the public sector is that different activi-
     ties within the same functional area possess different characteristics. Within the police protection
     function, for example, patrol activities possess few economies of scale while crime laboratory, dispatch-
     ing, and information system activities are all easier to measure, less labour intensive, more impersonal,
     and more efficiently performed for a larger population over a larger area. Thus, if a single organization is
     expected to perform all police activities, it will be too large to do some things efficiently and too small for
     the efficient performance of other things.
          While most citizens are not aware of it, most public-sector delivery systems have adapted to the dif-
     ferences in the characteristics of goods and services and the variations in characteristics among functional
     activities. At the same time, inefficient organizations continue to exist. This is because the difficulty of
     measuring many of the outputs makes it hard to compare the performance of various arrangements and be
     sure that production is at an appropriate scale. In the public sector, there are no market forces to put
     inefficient producers out of business.


     6.3     Service Delivery Options
     It is commonly perceived that public goods and services are produced or delivered by government
     employees. The local government makes the political and policy decisions and its own staff, under the
     direction of the chief administrative officer, delivers the services. This own-forces or in-house mode of
     production, however, is only one option. A main alternative is contracting with another public or private
     organization. Other possible arrangements include joint provision and production with one or more other
     governments, franchising, public-private partnerships, vouchering, and volunteer production. The
     Community Charter has also made it easier for municipalities to create separate municipally owned
     corporations to produce activities decided upon by the government. Each option can provide ways to
     achieve efficiencies of scale.
