                                                                                      SERVICE DELIVERY         85


Own-forces production
Production directly under the administration of the local government has been the most common mode for
most local government services. It is especially appropriate where the function is politically sensitive and
the output is hard to measure. An inability to measure output usually makes contracting out to another
organization inappropriate. A combination of political sensitivity and immeasurability makes citizen
access to politicians and political scrutiny of administrators an important part of responsive service.
Bylaw enforcement is a good example of such a function.
     There are two main limitations to own-forces production. First, the political organization may not
have the appropriate service area or population for an efficient scale of production. A small municipality,
would find it very expensive to have its own crime laboratory or criminal information system, but large
municipalities may find it difficult to handle police patrols efficiently.
     The second limitation is the difficulty of providing incentives for employees and administrators to be
efficient and innovative. There are usually no rewards for achieving cost-saving innovations and no
particular sanctions for continuing along traditional, less efficient paths. Thus bureaucracies, especially
large ones, tend to be inefficient and generally lag in the adoption of new technology or innovative
solutions to problems. Large external shocks are often necessary to generate change.
     It is not because the organization is public that such behaviour occurs but rather because it is a mo-
nopoly that has no threat to its survival and no real incentive to provide its employees or administrators
with rewards for efficient behaviour. It is simply an environment in which more of the same is the norm,
whether in the public or the private sector.

Contracted production
Contracting for the purchase of public goods and services from other public and private production
organizations is the primary alternative to own-forces production. It has a number of advantages over
own-forces production if certain conditions can be met. The advantages include improved information,
better opportunities to achieve scale economies, greater incentives to be technologically efficient and
better use of management time. The conditions include political acceptability, a competitive tendering
environment, and an ability to measure the inputs, outputs, or both.
    Contracting forces a local government to prepare detailed specifications and cost evaluations of the
services to be delivered. The data requirements for drafting a contract provide more information on public
service costs than is generally found in traditional government budget processes. This information can
permit public officials to know just what they get for the funds spent and what it will cost or save to make
additions or deletions to the service package. Developing such information requires some ability to
measure either outputs or inputs. For example, it is common to engage contractors for residential garbage
collection where the number of homes served and the number of tonnes collected can easily be counted,
together with the costs of producing the service.
    Another advantage to contracting is the potential for obtaining economies of scale related to speciali-
zation. The producing organization can adjust to an efficient size by obtaining business from more than
one purchaser. A firm that contracts to pick up one municipality’s residential waste may also contract
with other local governments and/or with commercial establishments to pick up their waste. Where
diseconomies set in at a smaller scale, a municipality can divide its area and let several contracts to
specialist producers, such as local recreation program organizations. Furthermore, where technological
change permits the producing organizations to be more efficient they will adapt to the change over time,
as new tenders are issued and new contracts are let. Own-forces producers are seldom this adaptable.
    If tenders are carefully issued, contracting can have significant benefits for local governments. Com-
petitive bids will be received from more than one supplier and, if the supplier wishes to retain the
