86       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     business over the long run, attention must be paid to cost-saving innovations and economic efficiency.
     This rivalry to be efficient encourages innovation that does not exist with own-forces production.
          Despite the advantages of contracting, problems may arise if officials are not careful. It is critical for
     the contractor to be responsive and efficient. This is most likely when several contractors seek the
     business and performance can be easily measured. Officials should avoid situations in which there is only
     one seller of a service, unless they are in a good bargaining position by retaining part of the production or
     always being able to go into production for themselves.
          Local governments that employ contracted production alternatives can realize additional benefits
     from using the time of their managers more effectively. The more services are contracted out, the more
     time the managers have to supervise activities that are unsuitable for contracted production. This allows
     the local government to keep its management staff small and efficient.
          In summary, where either inputs or outputs can be easily measured, where services are not politically
     sensitive, and where officials are knowledgeable, local governments can benefit from contracting and in
     many cases can provide a service for less than it would cost to produce it in house. The savings come
     from specifying service outputs, from the detailed cost evaluation required in the contract process, from
     the scale adjustments of the producer, and from the incentives to be efficient that are part of a competitive
     environment. It should be noted that the contracted producer may be another government, a nonprofit
     organization, a municipally owned corporation, or a private firm.
          Contracting is an important component of public service production for local governments in British
     Columbia. A detailed survey of 124 B.C. municipalities and regional districts in 1989 found that
     contractors were involved in the production of 32 percent of local government services, that the practice
     of contracting had increased over time, and that many local government managers expected it to continue
     increasing in the future (McDavid and Clemens, 1995).

     Joint provision and production
     Joint provision and production with one or more other local governments can permit appropriate scale
     adjustments for one or more local governments that may be too small to provide a desired service
     individually. It can range from the joint financing and organization of a single production unit, such as an
     intermunicipal library system or emergency dispatch centre, to the coordinated production of a particular
     activity, such as where several municipal fire departments have mutual aid agreements for fighting major
     fires.
           A joint production arrangement is usually own forces in nature but, where a joint agreement exists,
     there is generally more detailed scrutiny of results and costs than would be given to production by a
     government’s internal bureaucracy own forces. Such scrutiny can provide incentives for efficient
     production that go beyond simple adjustments to efficiencies of scale. A joint production agreement that
     is inefficient or does not meet the expectations of a sponsoring government can be phased out and other
     arrangements can be sought.
          Joint arrangements of this kind are common among local governments in urban areas. In British Co-
     lumbia, some regional district services can be regarded as being jointly provided by the municipalities
     within the regional district, especially if the service was originally jointly provided and produced under
     another arrangement, such as a water commission.
