                                                                                                                  SERVICE DELIVERY                 87


Corporate provision and production
Municipalities and regional districts may create or join corporations of various forms16 through which to
provide services. Corporations are used by a number of municipalities and regional districts in British
Columbia for various purposes, including community forest licences, regional economic development,
some protective services, employee housing, land development, and the district energy services discussed
in Chapter 8.
    The perceived advantages of corporations, especially when local governments wish to engage in
business activities, have made them an increasingly popular option for a number of local governments.
For instance, corporations can:
    • help local governments limit liability from legal claims;
    • protect the electorate from financial risk;
    • enable the local government to tap into special expertise while freeing council or board members
        to focus on other issues;
    • enable local governments to engage with other sectors such as First Nations, community busi-
        nesses, and nonprofit groups around a common goal; and
    • help the local government realize economies of scale by allowing a corporation to serve a wide
        geographic area in a more cost-effective manner than could each local government proceeding on
        its own.
Before deciding to incorporate, local governments must consider such matters as risk, setup, provincial
requirements, and federal tax laws.

Public-private partnership
A public-private partnership (P3) is a joint provision and production arrangement between a local
government and a private business firm for a community service. In such an arrangement, the two parties
share in the risks associated with the work. For example, the local government partner may provide
assistance in the form of grants, loans, tax exemptions, or disposal of property at less than market value,
while the private partner may assume the rest of the responsibility for it. A P3 is typically used for a
major public project, such as an arena that will be located on public land but will be designed, built, and
operated by the private partner.
    The authority for B.C. local governments to enter into P3 agreements was first granted in 1998, when
the Municipal Act was amended to broaden and enhance the corporate powers of municipalities. The
Community Charter and Local Government Act place some constraints on local government authority to
enter into a P3, such as a prohibition on waiving or reducing a development cost charge except in specific
circumstances, but the procedural requirements are otherwise generally like those for other service
delivery options. The provision for assistance under a P3 is one of several limited exceptions to an
otherwise longstanding general prohibition on local government aid to individual businesses.

Franchising
Franchises are awards of service monopolies. The producing organization finances its production through
user charges to consumers and there is no direct payment from the local government, which may still
regulate rates and other aspects of the activity. For example, a company that holds the franchise for solid
waste collection in a municipality has an exclusive monopoly in the area and charges residents for


16
      A corporation is a legal entity separate and apart from its owners, the shareholders. Legally, it has all the rights and obligations of an
individual. The corporation can enter into contracts, own real property, sue and be sued. A corporation may take a number of forms, including
business corporations, societies, and co-operatives.
