88       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     pickups. Likewise, a taxicab company that has an exclusive franchise to provide transportation between
     hotels and the local airport is financed by the fares it charges passengers.
          Franchises are most appropriate when there are cost savings from having a single producer and where
     user charges are the appropriate financing mechanism, such as where a public utility delivers electricity.
     The usual franchising process is to let tenders and award the franchise to the company offering either the
     best combination of price and service, or the largest payment to the government where price and service
     standards have been set in the tender.
          The use of franchises, like contracts, can permit adjustment to efficient production scales, and tenders
     can be let in a manner that will encourage efficient service. Franchises require the ability to quantify the
     services provided. In principle, the individuals who use the service should be able to do so by choice and
     be willing to pay for it through user charges instead of tax levies. This means that franchises have a more
     limited role than own-forces or contract production, but their careful use can improve the economic
     efficiency of local government service delivery while reducing the day-to-day management requirements
     of local administrators.

     Vouchering
     A voucher system can be used if the local government wishes to control production standards and service
     levels while at the same time enabling individuals to make their own service delivery choices. The
     government provides a person with a voucher that can be used to purchase a specified service from a
     qualified producer who is subsequently compensated by the government. The system is typically
     employed where a user fee might otherwise be charged, such as where a person receiving social assis-
     tance is provided with a voucher or pass for public transportation or recreation services.
         B.C. local governments rarely use voucher systems, in part because most social services for which
     they are applicable are provided by the provincial government. There have been arguments for introduc-
     ing a voucher system that would give families more choices in where to send their children to school. It is
     also argued that this would make individual schools more accountable because families would be able to
     vote with their feet and move to another school if they were dissatisfied with a school’s performance.

     Volunteer production and co-production
     An option that is sometimes overlooked in discussions of service delivery is the production of a service
     by citizen volunteers. The most obvious example is a volunteer fire department, of which there are many
     in British Columbia. Volunteers also produce recreation and community program services sponsored by
     local governments or partially funded by local government grants. As long as the level and quality of the
     service delivered by volunteers is acceptable to the community, volunteer production may be the most
     efficient of the possible options.
          Other types of citizen activity in local government service production, which can be numerous, are
     collectively called co-production activities. For example, when a person calls the police for assistance,
     brings the household garbage to a curbside for collection by municipal employees, or interacts with a
     teacher, the person is contributing to the delivery of the service in a fundamental way. Without such
     voluntary cooperation in the production process, a local government’s ability to deliver the service
     efficiently could be reduced or even nullified.
          It is important to understand the conceptual distinction between citizen participation in the policy-
     making process related to providing a service and participation in implementing the policy by producing
     the service. The two sets of activities are different from each other, although a person might engage in
     both, such as when a volunteer firefighter takes part in a decision to buy a new fire truck.
