                                                                                                                      SERVICE DELIVERY                  89


Summary of service delivery alternatives
Own-forces, contracted, and joint service production are the major ways local government services are
produced in British Columbia. Some use is made of corporations, public-private partnerships, franchises,
and vouchers, while volunteer production arrangements occur more frequently than one might expect.
This array of production alternatives gives local governments opportunities to provide a full range of
public services, from those which are labour intensive, face to face, and not easily measured, to those that
are capital intensive, impersonal, and measurable, at a variety of different scales and with incentives that
can lead to efficient production. Whether or not public officials use the most appropriate modes of
production for different activities depends on their own awareness of the options and the degree to which
they feel it is important to produce public services as efficiently and responsively as possible.


6.4        Service Delivery Performance
Measuring, evaluating, and reporting on the performance of local government has a more than 100-year
history in North America.17 Recent Canadian efforts include specific provincially mandated performance
reporting requirements in Ontario and Nova Scotia and a general, less specific “progress reporting”
requirement in British Columbia.
    Since 2004, the Community Charter has required British Columbia municipalities to prepare an an-
nual report that includes a discussion of progress related to objectives and measures established for that
year, as well as “a statement of municipal objectives, and the measures that will be used to determine
progress respecting those objectives, for the coming year.” It is left up to individual municipalities to
determine what the objectives should be, how they should be developed and how performance is to be
measured.
    By 2008, the results had been very modest with respect to citizen involvement in setting objectives
and responding to municipal reports. Municipalities have also been inconsistent in setting and relating
performance measures to municipal objectives,18 even though such efforts have the potential to increase
the benefits citizens receive from their taxes. It is well worth reviewing different approaches to perform-
ance measurement and evaluation, with the objective of achieving better, more widespread use of
performance measurement, evaluation, and reporting in the province.

Kinds of performance measurement
                                                              19


Basic concepts in performance measurement include four main elements:
    • The inputs or resources (people, materials, equipment, facilities, knowledge, etc.) often measured
        by their cost
    • The processes involved in transforming the inputs into outputs
    • The resulting outputs or products
    • The resulting outcomes or effects (intermediate, immediate, medium term, long term)


17
     An excellent review of the rationale and Canadian and American local government practices for performance management is presented in
Rich Hilderbrand, “Measuring and Managing Performance in Local Government: A Literature Review,” (2007).

18
     See a survey of the use of performance measures in B.C.’s municipalities by Lori Fischer, “Municipal Performance Measurement,
Performance Management and Citizen Engagement Practices in British Columbia,” (2007).

19
      The concepts described herein are the general terms used in economics and engineering. They are generally consistent with the concepts of
(operational or technical) efficiency, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness used by social scientists in program evaluation, as well as the concepts
of economy, efficiency, and effectiveness used by accountants in value for money auditing. While the accountability objectives of the various
disciplines are essentially the same, their conceptual foundations and definitions differ.
