90       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     The ability to understand and describe these elements of service delivery for an activity is essential to
     developing effective performance measurements and subsequent evaluation. While these four types of
     measures underlie all approaches to performance evaluation, any individual measure must be combined,
     compared, and often considered simultaneously with others in order to evaluate performance properly.
     Furthermore, the ability to develop measures will vary with different kinds of services and their character-
     istics.
          The way measures are gathered may differ for the different processes. The first three—inputs and
     their cost, processes, and outputs—will often be available from agency data. Measures of outcomes may
     come from agency data if it is undertaking systematic performance evaluations but this is not common.
     Measurements of outcomes often require special studies and will often include surveys of citizens to
     obtain information on actual results, opinions about government performance, and satisfaction with the
     outcomes.
          To better provide an understanding of why performance measurement is important, this section de-
     scribes the approaches used to evaluate local government activities, beginning with the most elementary
     and proceeding to full-fledged program evaluations and benefit-cost analyses. This section also includes
     discussions of sustainable performance and activity-based budgeting. Examples of appropriate perform-
     ance measures for different kinds of services are provided in subsequent chapters on those services.

     Performance evaluation
     Measuring inputs, processes, outputs, and outcomes provides a basis for performance evaluation.
     Performance evaluation involves comparisons, including:
         • Comparison of a physical measure with costs, such as cost per input, process, output, or outcome
            (e.g., cost per household of collecting residential solid waste is an output measure)
         • Comparison of a physical measure with time, such as time to perform a process, like processing a
            permit
         • Comparison of two physical measures, such as cases closed per police officer
     It is common to compare a physical measure with population (e.g., library books per capita) but these
     measures are primarily used to facilitate comparisons among different-sized local governments. They
     usually need to be combined with other measures for a more complete picture of how a service is
     delivered.
          Physical measures in relation to cost, time, or another physical measure can be useful for comparing
     service performance across producers, across local governments, or over time within a government. For
     example, one can measure the input cost per employee (including salary, benefits, vacation replacements,
     etc.); the cost of a process such as having a policeman with a patrol car on traffic duty for 24 hours; the
     cost per kilometre for street sweeping to compare own-forces and contracted production; the time it takes
     to process a building permit; or the time it takes to approve a subdivision application. All of these are
     performance measures but any single measure must always be understood in the context of other
     components of the service being delivered.

     Longitudinal, benchmarking, and cross-sectional comparisons
     The measures discussed above provide a minimal kind of comparison when they are taken in isolation. A
     longitudinal comparison, which involves comparing performance over time, can allow government
     managers to spot trends and see whether they indicate service improvement. This approach can satisfy the
     Community Charter requirements and is the easiest for a government to do but it is a minimal approach in
     terms of improving government operations. Longitudinal comparisons must also pay attention to base-line
     measures of performance over time from the beginning of the program.
