                                                                                       SERVICE DELIVERY          91


     Cross-sectional comparisons and benchmarking can be more useful than longitudinal comparisons for
improving service performance. Benchmarking usually involves comparing performance to a stated
objective, such as a fire department’s objective of taking three minutes or less to respond to all emergency
calls. Another benchmark that is quite common in administrative organizations is to answer the telephone
by the third ring. Benchmarks can be constructed by managers, staff, and citizens, by elected officials, or
they can be adapted from industry standards that already exist.
     Benchmarking can also be done by comparing a local government’s performance to that of other,
similar, local governments. These cross-sectional comparisons let managers see how well their organiza-
tion is doing relative to the others but they require all of the organizations to use standardized measures.
Comparison of performance measures among municipalities is the objective of both the Ontario and Nova
Scotia systems where the provincial government has specified the performance measures that municipali-
ties must produce. The provincial government in British Columbia has not made this step.
     Longitudinal, cross-sectional, and benchmarking comparisons can help managers and the councils
that supervise them improve performance. Cross-sectional comparisons also allow managers to make use
of best practices by learning how best-performing organizations undertake their production activities.
Rivalry with neighbouring municipalities can also provide an incentive for managers and councils to
improve performance.
     One must be careful about using any single performance measure to evaluate production performance
because actions aimed at improving some measures may adversely affect others. For example, if
processes are speeded up, the number of errors may increase and overall service quality could decline. If
police are rude to people who report crimes, the crime rate may fall as citizens choose to avoid contact
with the police and report fewer crimes, even though the victimization rate may actually be increasing.
     Single measures and simple comparisons must be carefully used when evaluating the performance of
a local government activity. This can be done by being sure any evaluations include multiple measures.
For example, in evaluating policing it is desirable to have departmental statistics, which include costs, and
citizen survey data and some unobtrusive measures, such as the number of times an officer on patrol
drives down a street. Similarly, one is interested in the cost per litre for water supply and also in measures
of pressure, sanitation, and mineral content. For all local government services there are multiple measures
of performance, often developed and/or disseminated by specialist professional, trade, and other
associations.

Using performance measures for major evaluations
Performance measures can be used to describe trends over time, compare service production across local
governments, or compare alternative service delivery options within a local government (own forces
versus contractor, for example). To determine why performance changes over time or why one municipal-
ity performs better than another, more comprehensive performance evaluations are needed.
     There are two major approaches for major evaluations. Most common is program evaluation, in
which an organization’s achievement of specific program objectives is systematically evaluated. A second
is benefit-cost analysis, which is most commonly used to evaluate large capital investments like a new
transit line or alternative investments to treat sewage. Benefit-cost analysis can include cost-effectiveness
analysis.

Program evaluation
Program evaluations measure how well defined objectives have been and/or are being achieved and also
look at why programs either did or did not achieve their objectives. They do not require translating
outputs or outcomes into dollar values. They do, however, require that the desired outputs and outcomes
be specified so that they are measurable. This does not mean that less measurable outcomes should be
