92       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     ignored but, unless there are some measurable outputs and outcomes, it is difficult to compare program
     results over time or with other similar programs.
         Program evaluations typically require more resources than are expended on routine performance
     measurement. Their scope and scale depends on the issues that are being assessed. They usually are done
     every three to five years, and are often focused on major programs or services.
         Program evaluations make use of multiple performance measures. For example, if an evaluation is
     looking at whether a community policing program is working, performance data on crimes and calls for
     service can be combined with survey and/or interview data with police officers, volunteers, citizens, and
     council members to construct a multifaceted picture of the effectiveness of the program. The key to a
     successful program evaluation is to have multiple independent lines of evidence upon which to base
     conclusions and recommendations.
         Another important component of program evaluations is systematic accounting for important back-
     ground or environmental variables. These are measures of conditions that may influence the success of
     the program but are not controlled by the program producers. For example, in studies of elementary
     school performance it is necessary to take into account the socio-economic characteristics of the parents
     of the school population and the results of tests of student readiness for enrollment in school. For
     policing, it is important to take into account the socio-economic characteristics of the residents, including
     age and gender distribution, in the area being policed. By taking into account environmental conditions,
     an evaluator can better determine the actual effects of a program.

     Benefit-cost analysis and economic impact studies
     A benefit-cost analysis measures the economic efficiency of a program or investment, taking into account
     all costs and all benefits regardless of to whom they accrue or how long they take to accrue. Its most
     significant characteristic is that all inputs, outputs, and outcomes must be quantified in monetary terms.
     This is because comprehensive evaluations to determine economic efficiency, in contrast to technical
     efficiency, require a common denominator, the easiest of which is money. For example, in doing a
     benefit-cost analysis of K–12 education, a major measured benefit would be the child-minding services
     that schools perform so parents can work, and that benefit would be quantified and valued in dollar terms.
     In contrast, a program evaluation of an education program would be confined to questions of how well
     educational objectives were being achieved in terms of measures like attendance, test scores, and
     percentage advancing to the next grade or graduating. No attempt would be made to place monetary
     values on those outcomes.
          Benefit-cost analyses are useful for comparing alternate ways to accomplish a particular or similar
     objective, such as two different transit plans or two different sewage treatment options, because the
     difficulties in assigning monetary values to the inputs, outputs, and outcomes will be similar for both
     alternatives. For example, for a transportation investment the most important benefit is travel time saved.
     By valuing travel time at the same amount per hour in each study, the comparison will be more useful.
     Benefit-cost analysis is not a good approach for comparing programs that are very different (e.g., a
     hospital versus a freeway) or have very different time perspectives.
          Another kind of analysis, an economic impact study, is sometimes confused with a benefit-cost analy-
     sis. An economic impact study measures the total amount of spending that will result after making an
     investment. For example, advocates of a new sports arena or convention centre will often compare its
     initial costs with its economic impacts, usually hoping that citizens will interpret the impacts as benefits.
     However, the impacts are only a measure of gross benefits, not net benefits. The difference is best
     understood with respect to the revenue of a business. Gross revenue is the total value of its sales but it
     would not be in business very long if it made decisions comparing investment costs only with gross
     revenue and did not take into account the costs of running the business, purchasing the items it was
