                                                                                      SERVICE DELIVERY         93


selling, etc. Likewise, any measure of gross economic impacts must first subtract all the costs of
providing the services to the persons doing the spending in order to obtain a measure approximating net
benefits in dollar terms. Usually the net benefits are 10 to 15 percent of the gross benefits. While one may
be interested in measuring the economic impact of a capital project, impacts should not be confused with
benefits. Measures of gross impacts alone are not an appropriate basis for calculating benefits or
efficiency.

Sustainable performance
Since 1987, when the concept of “sustainable development” was defined in the 1987 Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development (the Brundtland report) as “… development that meets
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,”
local governments are increasingly placing importance on ensuring that the performance of their plans,
services, and other activities generally meet this definition of sustainability. For example, the long-term
sustainability of the water supply system is an important concern for many local governments.
     In a number of respects, British Columbia has played a leading role in addressing questions of sus-
tainable development. The City of Vancouver has served as host of two international conferences related
to the topic, including the first United Nations Conference on Human Settlements in 1976 and the 2006
U.N. World Urban Forum, whose theme was “Our Future: Sustainable Cities—Turning Ideas into
Action.” Since 1993, the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of B.C. has actively
promoted the concept of sustainability among its members and in the larger community, including the
publication of a sustainability primer in 2002. The Greater Vancouver Regional District has pursued
sustainability objectives for many years and many other local governments in B.C. have adopted policies
and undertaken projects to promote more sustainable community development.
     Economic analysis is capable of taking into account the values of “green” or “sustainability” costs
and benefits that pertain in local government decision making, wherein comparative measures for
different kinds of resources and external effects can be developed. For example, one can measure the
percentage of paper that is post-consumer recycled or the tonnes of carbon dioxide emitted in relation to
the tonnes of coal used to generate electricity. These kinds of measures can provide for evaluations of
alternative approaches to particular goals. However, the translations into the dollar terms that are
necessary for an economic-efficiency analysis are exceptionally difficult because economic analysis
attempts to identify prices from the behaviour of buyers and sellers in markets and make inferences to
non-market transactions.
     Economic analysis also discounts benefits and costs that accrue in the future to account for people’s
observed behaviour, in which they expect an increase in future benefits to make up for costs incurred
today. However, the sustainability criterion implies that reliance on the values of people engaging in day-
to-day transactions is insufficient to take into account external effects like climate change and thus the
future is discounted too much. As with any benefit-cost analysis, attempts to take these different values
into account can be included in the analysis but they must recognize that one may be changing the
valuation from attempts to identify the values that emerge from current observable behaviour to substitut-
ing an expert or advocates opinion as to what values should be used and how the future should be treated.
     The important consideration in a democracy is that policies, programs, and capital projects, including
those to achieve sustainable development, have to pass muster in the political decision-making process,
for which all studies and analyses are an aid, not a determinant. The sustainability criterion has the most
impact not in analytical studies, where the treatment of external effects and time is always important, but
in what local officials take into account in making decisions.
     Local elected officials in B.C. serve three-year terms and have been known to neglect activities that
have few short-term benefits but significant long-term implications. Examples of this can be seen in the
