                                                                                       SERVICE DELIVERY          95


     The activity-based budgeting approach shown in Exhibit 6–2 illustrates how a traditional line-item
approach could be adapted to produce activity costs. While most of the cost of an activity is usually
included within a single department’s budget, activity-based budgets show information that crosses
departmental lines. In addition a share of overhead (general departmental operation costs) can be
allocated as a percentage that activity is of the department’s budget.
     In the example, which shows the costs of a parks and recreation department’s arena operations, the
cost of solid waste collection by the public works department, and cost of security and traffic manage-
ment for arena events by the police department are added to the parks and recreation department budget.
When all of these costs are shown, an administrator or elected official can see what it costs to operate the
arena and whether or not user charges cover these costs. This cost data also allows the calculation of a
variety of performance measures, such as cost per attendee, cost per event, and cost per population. These
costs can be tracked longitudinally and used cross-sectionally to compare performance with arenas
operated by other governments.
     Activity-based budgeting requires increased recordkeeping and estimates for items for smaller items,
such as office supplies that are not worth costing out. In practice each local government would have to
decide which items were sufficiently important and of a sufficient expenditure level to introduce costing
for that item. With current budgeting technology it is relatively easy to identify and keep track of the 20
percent of a government’s activities that are likely to account for 80 percent of its costs. In B.C., regional
districts already have to cost out their activities so that costs can be assigned to the area in which the
service is provided and not charged to the regional district as a whole.

The use of performance measures in British Columbia
The Community Charter goal of citizen participation in formulating municipal objectives and developing
performance measures to track achievement is not being met in most B.C. municipalities. Because citizen
participation tends to occur only when there is a specific action that affects citizens in a major way, the
development of goals and performance measures may be too routine to attract the kind of attention that
creates more widespread participation. Citizens do not expect to have to supervise the details of govern-
ment production—that is what they elect council and board members to do.
    The two major groups of users of performance information should be the elected council and board
members, who hire and supervise administrators, and the administrators themselves, who need good
information (and especially best practices information from comparative studies) so they can be better
managers. This is where the focus should be on getting performance measures developed and used for
evaluation.
    It is not clear what kind of additional incentives could be created to encourage the development and
use of standardized performance measures for evaluating local service production in British Columbia. It
would be helpful to monitor how well the municipal performance measurement programs in Ontario and
Nova Scotia may be for producing useful results.


6.5     Local Government Service Delivery Systems
Local governments in B.C. use a variety of service production arrangements that reflect the variety in
characteristics of goods and services, production processes, and alternate arrangements for relating
production to policymaking. For example, a single function like police protection involves many different
activities, including patrol, detention, dispatch, investigation, information, training, laboratory, and other
services. These are produced by various organizations and coordinated through several different
production approaches, including direct own-forces production, contracted production, and joint
production with other local, provincial, and federal government agencies.
