96       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



         Although the various production arrangements may be systematic and efficient, the complexity of the
     resulting service delivery system could appear to be chaotic and uncoordinated to an outside observer
     unless it is explained in a manner that makes it more understandable. This and the next chapters of this
     book explain many of the service and regulatory functions for which B.C. local governments are
     responsible.

     Administrative support functions
     The functions that will be examined in the next chapters can be generally categorized as operating
     functions and activities involving the direct delivery of services and administration of regulations. There
     is also a group of functions and activities within a local government bureaucracy that involve the
     provision of administrative support for the operating activities. They include:
         • General administration (legislative and administrative support to the council or board, general
             management, corporate administration, legal services)
         • Financial administration (budget preparation, revenue collection, management of funds, purchas-
             ing)
         • Human resource administration (personnel management, labour relations)
         • Information systems administration (computing services, local area networks, geographic infor-
             mation systems)
     This list is indicative rather than exhaustive. For example, other support activities include building and
     vehicle management. For municipalities and regional districts, the functions in this list are usually
     included in the “general government” category of expenditures, although in larger municipalities some
     may be allocated to the specific functions they support.

     Operating functions
     Like the administrative support functions, the general categories of operating functions to be examined in
     the next chapters are in many respects similar those listed in Exhibits 3–3 and 4–5. Protective services are
     discussed in Chapter 7, engineering services in Chapter 8, human services in Chapter 9, and regulatory
     and development functions in Chapter 10.
        In general, the examination of the service delivery system for each function begins with a brief discus-
     sion of its general nature and characteristics. This is followed by an exposition of the policy framework
     within which the service is provided, including identification of the demand-articulating or policymaking
     body. It is usually the local government that is responsible for decision making and financing, but it may
     be a provincial ministry.
         The service production arrangements are discussed next. The direct producer, the organization that
     delivers the service directly to citizens, will often be a bureaucratic department of the responsible local
     government. Some indirect producers who provide particular services to the direct producer instead of
     directly to citizens are also identified. For example, the organizations providing academy training to
     police department employees or computer services to a school for recordkeeping are indirect producers
     whose services are commonly arranged under contractual or joint production agreements.
         Finally, the ways in which the performance of the service can be measured and evaluated are dis-
     cussed. By examining these provision and production arrangements with reference to the concepts
     discussed in Chapter 1, the policymaking frameworks discussed in Chapters 2 through 5, and the service
     delivery topics discussed in this chapter, one can begin to understand how local government services are
     provided and, due to the different characteristics of the different activities within a function, why the local
     government system appears so complex.
