                                                                                   PROTECTIVE SERVICES           97




 Chapter Seven
Protective Services


P
       rotective service functions include police protection, fire protection, ambulance services, emer-
       gency protection, regulatory functions such as building inspection, animal control, and bylaw
       enforcement which are discussed in Chapter 10, and public health which is described in Chapter 9.
In British Columbia, ambulance services in all areas have been provided by the provincial government
since 1974. The police, fire, and emergency protection services provided by municipalities, and to some
extent, regional districts are the subjects of this chapter.


7.1     Police Protection
The legislative framework for policing in British Columbia allows a variety of approaches. However, the
organization through which most municipal cooperation is undertaken, a regional district, is not available
for policing without separate special legislation because policing is regulated by the attorney general or
solicitor general, not the municipal affairs ministry. Given the variety and the diversity of activities that
comprise the police protection function, it should not be surprising that policing has evolved to include
many different organizations and arrangements among them. It is impossible to examine all aspects of the
service in this chapter but a reasonable understanding of how local governments have come to fulfil this
important function can be gained from a description of the nature of the service, the historical context, the
provision framework, the production arrangements, and performance measurements.

The nature of police services
The police protection function includes maintaining public safety, keeping the peace, preventing crime,
and enforcing the law, including not only what we think of as policing on the street, but also activities
dealing with fraud and identity theft. Public safety is a public good. Where it is provided, all citizens in
the area benefit. A safe environment in which people are protected from criminal acts is a basic prerequi-
site for citizens to carry out their daily activities.
     There is a considerable range of police protection activities, including general patrols to prevent crime
and respond to calls for service, community-based crime prevention initiatives, criminal investigations,
traffic law enforcement, and indirect or support services such as dispatch operations, information systems,
detention facilities, forensic laboratories, and police academies. Police are also involved in numerous
other activities, such as personal distress assistance, crowd control, emergency planning, motor vehicle
accident investigation, escorting important officials, and giving advice on crime prevention through
environmental design. The effective performance of many of these activities depends on citizen coopera-
tion in securing homes and workplaces, participating in crime prevention programs, reporting crimes,
assisting investigators, and generally abiding by the law.
     Police protection activities vary somewhat from one situation to another, depending on the nature of
the community, the characteristics of citizens, the types of businesses, the relationships between the local
community and other areas, and the attitudes of residents toward each other, the government, and the
police. For example, in a homogeneous community in which residents are aware of intrusions by
strangers, they may feel that they need relatively few police officers on patrol. In contrast, people in an
area of high density, mixed population, and individual autonomy may want more police resources devoted
