98       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



     to their protection. Because of these variations in objectives and environments, it is impossible to specify
     one best way to organize police services.
          The variations in characteristics among police activities and the communities they serve can compli-
     cate measurement, management, and organizational arrangements. Some activities, such as detention of
     prisoners, are more capital intensive and the outputs, such as the number of persons detained in a given
     period of time, are measurable. Other activities, such as running a criminal information system or a crime
     laboratory, are more labour intensive and performance is more difficult to evaluate. Still others, such as
     general patrols, are labour intensive and involve important face-to-face relationships between the police
     and citizens. This makes the effectiveness of patrolling extremely difficult to measure and evaluate in
     relation to the general objective of public safety. Thus, while a variety of organizational arrangements for
     delivering police services have evolved in response to the diversity of police activities, community needs,
     and environments in B.C., measurement problems make it difficult to compare the economic efficiency of
     the different arrangements.
          All areas of British Columbia have police protection. The provincial police service is delivered by the
     Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) under a federal-provincial contract. It protects unincorporated
     areas and small municipalities. Other municipalities are protected by either a municipal unit of the
     provincial police or an independent department. First Nations reserves are protected either by the RCMP
     or a First Nations-administered police service. The provincial police also produce specialized services,
     such as DNA analysis, that are delivered on a province-wide basis.

     History of policing in British Columbia
     The British Columbia Provincial Police force (BCPP) was established in 1866, succeeding colonial
     constabularies that had been created in 1858. In 1950, following the example of six other provinces, B.C.
     decided to phase out the BCPP and contract with the federal government to have the RCMP deliver
     provincial police services. Factors that influenced this decision included provincial concerns about
     increasing costs, related concerns about a movement within the BCPP to form a police union, a federal
     offer to deliver the service much more cheaply, a federal government desire to have a truly national police
     agency that could respond effectively to national security threats, and a provincial government desire to
     deflect criticisms of its performance in dealing with the militant Sons of Freedom religious sect. The
     RCMP has continued to serve as B.C.’s provincial police force since 1950.
         The first municipal police force in B.C. was established in Victoria in 1873, closely followed by New
     Westminster. Under the 1881 Municipalities Act, municipal councils were officially empowered to
     establish their own police forces and appoint officers who would, however, still take direction from the
     superintendent of the BCPP. A few years later, the council’s governance powers were transferred to a
     three-person board of police commissioners, chaired by the mayor, which evolved into today’s police
     board. The powers of police boards were significantly increased in 1914, when a new Municipal Act
     required municipalities to provide police services, rather than simply permitting them to do so. From 1917
     to 1957, all police board members had to be elected by local citizens.
         The 1914 Act also gave municipalities the option to contract with the province for the delivery of
     local police services by the BCPP. However, it was only after 1924–25, when the BCPP’s power to
     deliver the services under contract was clarified, that B.C. municipalities began to take advantage of this
     option. By 1929, the BCPP was serving 22 municipalities.
         By 1950 there were only 11 independent police departments left in the province. One was added
     when Matsqui re-established its own police force in 1955, and one was subtracted when the Victoria and
     Esquimalt police forces amalgamated in 2003. As of 2006, 12 municipalities were protected by the 11
     independent departments listed in Exhibit 7–1, 59 were served by municipal units of the provincial police
     and 86 smaller municipalities were protected by the provincial police.
