100   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   Police service provision framework
  Police services in B.C. are provided by the provincial government and by municipalities whose popula-
  tions exceed 5,000, in accordance with the Police Act and the Vancouver Charter. The provincial director
  of police services administers the Police Act and generally supervises police services in B.C. with respect
  to such things as policy, research, statistics, standards, performance evaluation, and the coordination of
  provincial and municipal police activities.
       Provincial police services are delivered by the RCMP in accordance with a 1992–2012 federal-
  provincial agreement that provides for the federal government to pay 30 percent of the provincial police
  cost and, depending on population, 30 or 10 percent of the cost of RCMP municipal units, as discussed
  below. All RCMP forces in B.C. are directed by the commanding officer of the RCMP’s E Division, who
  in turn is responsible to the provincial minister, the commissioner of the RCMP and, ultimately, the
  minister of public safety, Canada. Provincial authorities do not have the power to deal with complaints
  against the RCMP, which are the jurisdiction of the RCMP Public Complaints Commission, a federal
  government body.
       Under the Police Act, a municipality of more than 5,000 people has four options for providing a po-
  lice service. It may:
       • create its own independent municipal police force;
       • create an amalgamated independent police force with one or more other municipalities, as has
           been done in Victoria and Esquimalt;
       • contract to purchase police services from another municipality that has an independent police
           force; or
       • contract with the minister for a municipal unit of the provincial police (the RCMP under contract
           to the provincial government) to deliver the service.
  In 2006, 28 percent of the provincial population was served by 11 independent municipal police forces
  and 55 percent was protected by 59 municipal units of the provincial police. The remaining 17 percent
  was served by provincial police units or policing services administered by First Nations. There were no
  contracts for the delivery of full police services by one municipality to another, although several
  municipalities had seriously considered this option.
       Municipal police services are financed primarily by local property taxes and, where a municipal unit
  of the provincial police delivers the service, the federal government cost shares. Provincial police services
  to unincorporated areas and small municipalities are financed by various provincial revenue sources,
  including federal contributions and provincial rural property taxes. In 2007, a new police financing model
  was introduced that requires municipalities with populations below 5,000 persons and people in
  unincorporated areas to pay a share of their policing costs. Under the new model, less than 50 percent of
  the total cost for the provincial force will be collected from property taxpayers in these areas.
       Major amendments to the Police Act in 1997 included new provisions for the minister to establish
  “designated policing units” staffed by “designated constables” to supplement or replace the policing and
  law enforcement services otherwise delivered by B.C.’s provincial and municipal police forces, and
  “designated law enforcement units” staffed by “enforcement officers” to enforce specific laws of Canada
  and B.C., such as laws pertaining to environmental conservation. The new designated units can be
  established only in response to an application by a municipality, a regional district, a government
  corporation, or “any other prescribed entity.” It is intended that the new designated constables and
  enforcement officers will eventually replace the special provincial constables that have been described in
  Section 9 of the Act for many years. Designated policing units established since 1997 include the B.C.
  Organized Crime Agency (now called the Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit), the TransLink
