                                                                                                             PROTECTIVE SERVICES              101


police service, and four units established under the First Nations Administered Policing Services
(FNAPS) program.20
    Two nonprofit corporations established under the 1997 Emergency Communications Corporations
Act provide integrated emergency communications systems for police, fire, and other services in the
Lower Mainland and Greater Victoria. Before these bodies were established, there had been a variety of
systems and frequencies that made communications between different police forces unreliable. E-Comm
(Emergency Communications for Southwest British Columbia Incorporated) is owned by its member
municipalities, police boards, and senior government agencies. It is governed by a 17-person board of
directors nominated by the shareholders. CREST (Capital Region Emergency Services Telecommunica-
tions) is owned by its member municipalities, the Capital Regional District, BC Transit, and the Province
of British Columbia. It is governed by a 20-person board of directors consisting of councillors appointed
by each member municipality, three electoral area directors, and appointed representatives of non-
municipal members, such as the RCMP, BC Transit, BC Ambulance Service, and the Province of British
Columbia.
    In addition to government-sponsored and financed policing it is important to recognize that many
organizations also employ private security services to enhance public safety and protect property. In
Canada there are more than twice as many licensed private security personnel than there are public police.
Security personnel in British Columbia are regulated by the provincial government under the Private
Investigators and Security Agencies Act and regulations which require, among other things, that security
patrol licensees take two training courses from the Justice Institute. It is common for private security
firms and personnel to have close relationships with police departments. For example, in Vancouver the
city pays the Downtown Business Improvement Association to hire private security ambassadors who
provide information to citizens and act as a security presence in public places.

Provision of RCMP municipal unit services
The standard municipal-provincial contract for RCMP services requires the municipality to pay for all
operations and maintenance costs, including most equipment, and to provide the clerical support staff and
accommodation needed for police operations. The RCMP is responsible for delivering all direct services,
such as patrolling, and indirect services, such as laboratory work and academy training provided by the
RCMP’s larger organization. In some municipalities to which detachments are wholly dedicated, such as
Burnaby, the RCMP behaves much like an independent police force, with a general emphasis on a
community-based policing approach that permits the police officers to become relatively familiar with the
neighbourhoods they serve. In other cases, where the detachment headquarters may house more than one
municipal unit, as well as units serving unincorporated areas, the relationships with individual municipali-
ties may not be as close.
     A degree of local governance with respect to RCMP municipal units is permitted by Part 7 of the
Police Act, which provides for establishing a local police committee consisting of not less than three
members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Thus, it is possible for each municipality to
establish a local committee to oversee its police services and articulate the goals, objectives, and priorities
it wants its police force to emphasize.
     Most municipalities have opted for RCMP services because the federal government shares policing
costs. Under the 1992–2012 federal-provincial agreement, the federal government pays 30 percent of
RCMP municipal unit costs where populations are 5,000 to 15,000, and 10 percent of municipal unit costs

20
      Of the four FNAPS units, the only one that was still active in 2005 was the Stl’atl’imx Tribal Police, which has served 10 bands in the
Lillooet area since 1999. The Ditidaht First Nation Public Safety and Policing Services and the Kitasoo-Xaixais Public Safety Department closed
in 2004. The Tsewultun unit closed in 2000. Each was governed by a police board representing the communities served by the unit and all police
officers were appointed under the B.C. Police Act. Canada paid 52 percent of the cost and B.C. paid 48 percent.
