102    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   where populations exceed 15,000. The cost savings to municipalities are significant. In 2006, for
   example, the reported average cost of policing for the 59 municipalities with RCMP municipal units was
   $166 per capita, substantially less than the average cost of $273 per capita for the 12 municipalities served
   by independent police departments.

   Provision of independent municipal police services
  While a municipality served by an RCMP municipal unit has a limited ability to govern its police
  services, a municipality with its own police department has a mandate to govern the service by establish-
  ing a municipal police board consisting of the mayor, who chairs the board, one person appointed by the
  council, and up to five people appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. A modified structure
  may be used for an amalgamated department like that in Victoria and Esquimalt, whose nine-member
  board consists of the Victoria mayor, who serves as the chair, the Esquimalt mayor, who serves as vice-
  chair, one person appointed by each municipal council, and five people appointed by the Lieutenant
  Governor in Council.
      Provincial appointments to police boards are made in consultation with the ministry’s director of
  police services, to whom a municipality may informally provide a list of the people it would like to see
  considered. Otherwise, a municipal council’s formal governance powers are limited to appointing one
  board member and approving the annual budget recommended by the police board.
      The police board’s responsibilities include establishing the municipal force, appointing a chief con-
  stable, establishing policies and procedures for administering the department, preparing an annual budget
  for the council’s approval and, in the person of the chair, dealing with complaints against the chief
  constable, the deputy chief, or the police department as a whole. A complaint against an individual
  constable would normally be made initially to the chief constable, but any complaint can ultimately go to
  the police complaint commissioner.

   Police service production arrangements
   Police services in B.C. are delivered through a variety of own-forces, contract, joint, and volunteer
   production arrangements. The independent municipal police departments are staffed by municipal
   employees while the RCMP, itself an own-forces organization, delivers provincial and municipal police
   services under contract. Municipalities served by the RCMP obtain direct and indirect police services
   primarily from the RCMP organization. Large departments like Vancouver’s may also internalize most of
   their production activities. Smaller independent departments use some of the indirect services provided by
   the RCMP and may also contract with other independent departments for the delivery of services like
   dispatch and detention.
       In 2006, police services in B.C. were delivered by a total of 8,652 police officers, including 2,214 in
   11 independent departments, 3,058 in 59 RCMP municipal units, 12 in services administered by First
   Nations, and 808 in RCMP provincial police units. Other RCMP officers in B.C. included 148 in division
   administration, 630 in provincial headquarters, 240 in district headquarters, 369 assigned to traffic
   enforcement, 939 federal officers, and 105 assigned to the First Nations community policing services
   program. In 2006, the TransLink Police Service had 103 officers and an additional 26 RCMP members
   provided services specific to the Vancouver International Airport. There were also civilian members,
   support staff, reserves, auxiliaries, and special law enforcement units.

   General patrol, investigation, community liaison, and support activities
   The basic organization of an independent police department in B.C. is generally straightforward. The
   chief constable and deputy chief are responsible for overall leadership, direction, and administration, and
   the department is typically organized into divisions reflecting its general patrol, investigation, crime
