                                                                                   PROTECTIVE SERVICES      103


prevention, support, and other activities. The chief constable normally has a secretary or assistant who, in
a smaller department, may perform other administrative duties. RCMP detachments are organized
similarly, with the larger ones headed by an inspector, the smaller ones by a sergeant.
     Most officers in B.C.’s police departments and detachments are assigned to patrol duties, usually in
police cars but sometimes on foot or bicycles. Their duties include patrolling, responding to calls for
service, enforcing traffic and other laws, enforcing some municipal bylaws, conducting investigations,
arresting offenders, appearing in court, and doing associated administrative work. Patrol officers may also
take part in crime prevention and community liaison activities.
     In all but the smaller organizations, the patrol division is organized in four watches or platoons, each
headed by a more senior officer, and all patrol officers work twelve-hour shifts on an eight-day cycle,
including two night shifts, two day shifts, and four days off. At least one department has sought to
introduce a revised approach to scheduling aimed at maximizing strength at certain times, such as on
weekends, but the initiative met with resistance and was not pursued. Small detachments may work on
different schedules and may close the station at night.
     All but the smallest police departments or detachments have at least one detective who conducts
investigations and at least one officer assigned to crime prevention, school, and community liaison duties.
The latter activity has assumed increasing importance over the years as municipal police forces have
endeavoured to apply community-based policing principles in delivering their services and fostering the
establishment of Block Watch, Neighbourhood Watch, and other community-based safety and security
initiatives. Department and detachment support services, delivered largely by civilian staff, include such
activities as secretarial assistance, records management, call taking, dispatching, data processing, data
analysis, court liaison, and exhibit control.
     It is also increasingly common for smaller departments in urban areas to contract with a larger de-
partment for specialized services. For example, the District of Oak Bay has an arrangement for the
delivery of police dispatching, homicide investigation, general crime investigation, investigative support,
and administrative support services by the larger police department in the District of Saanich, which has a
policy of providing such services at cost to other municipalities. This, plus arrangements with other
agencies in the region, allows a small municipality like Oak Bay to provide a full range of policing
services for its citizens while still producing an in-house police patrol service that maintains a commu-
nity-policing atmosphere in the municipality.

Communications and information activities
Communications and information systems play vital roles in the delivery of police services, especially in
more heavily urbanized areas. The activities in B.C. include:
   • 9-1-1 emergency call answering and dispatch
   • Telecommunications between police and other emergency services
   • Real-time information sharing and management
Except in the Lower Mainland and Greater Victoria, RCMP detachments throughout B.C. are served by
one RCMP telecommunications system.
    As noted above, two public corporations provide emergency communications systems for police, fire,
and other services in the Lower Mainland and Capital Regional District (CRD). In other areas of the
province, local governments, especially regional districts, provide such services. The E-Comm radio
system is a communications network that is shared throughout the Greater Vancouver Regional District
(GVRD) by police, fire, and ambulance personnel. On a day-to-day basis, the radio system makes it easier
for police and other public safety agencies to work together in cases of joint emergency response,
criminal investigations, police pursuits, and other events that cross municipal boundaries. E-Comm
provides wide-area radio (WAR) services to all the police agencies in the Lower Mainland. It also
