104   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   provides ambulance radio service to the entire GVRD and its WAR system is used by the Vancouver,
   North Vancouver City, Richmond, Delta, White Rock, New Westminster, Coquitlam, Port Moody, and
   Surrey fire departments.
       In the CRD, the CREST system provides police, fire, ambulance, and other agencies with an inte-
   grated radio communications network that became fully operational in 2004. It replaced separate systems
   operated by the RCMP, the City of Victoria, and BC Transit. The 9-1-1 emergency call answering system
   is coordinated through a centralized system that automatically directs calls to communications and
   dispatch centres operated by several independent departments, the RCMP, and Canadian Forces Base
   Esquimalt.
       There are three main police information systems in B.C. A Canada-wide service is provided by the
   Canadian Police Information Centre (CPIC), which is based in RCMP headquarters in Ottawa and
   delivers its information services free of charge. PRIME-BC, a province-wide Police Records Information
   Management Environment system used by all independent policing agencies and RCMP detachments, is
   an online data-sharing system that provides up-to-the-minute information about criminals and crimes.
   PMIS, a Police Management Information System is managed by the ministry responsible for police
   services, which maintains aggregated statistical data from the Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics
   Uniform Crime Reporting Survey (UCR) and other sources.

   Other police service production activities
  B.C. police activities include a variety of specialized law enforcement services delivered by various
  traffic, street crime, fraud, dog, drug, major crime, organized crime, and other special units, squads, or
  programs based in individual departments, detachments, district headquarters, or provincial headquarters.
  Some services, such as police dog units, may be available to other municipal forces on either a contractual
  or a goodwill basis.
       Traffic laws are enforced by RCMP officers based in detachments throughout the province, as well as
  by general-duty officers in individual detachments and departments, who may also assist local govern-
  ments in traffic planning. In 2005, an integrated unit of 15 members seconded from the local independent
  and RCMP forces was established to enforce traffic laws in Greater Victoria.
       Other activities in B.C. include:
       • Emergency response team (ERT) services delivered by highly trained RCMP and independent
            department teams in Greater Vancouver and on Vancouver Island
       • Forensic identification services delivered by individual specialists employed within a police
            organization or engaged on a contractual basis
       • Forensic laboratory services delivered by the RCMP provincial laboratory to all municipalities
            free of charge and by the Vancouver Police Department’s own facility
       • Detention facilities housed within police stations or, for smaller departments, arranged on a con-
            tractual basis
       • Police training for independent departments delivered by the Police Academy of the Justice Insti-
            tute of B.C., a provincial government agency
       • Air services delivered by the RCMP
       • Marine services delivered by the RCMP and the Vancouver Police Department
       • Underwater dive-team services delivered by the RCMP and the Saanich Police Department
       • Victim assistance services delivered by police officers and trained volunteers, with financial
            support from the province, local governments, and private contributors
       • Advisory services regarding crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED)
