                                                                                   PROTECTIVE SERVICES          105


    •    Supplementary services delivered by RCMP auxiliaries, independent department reserves, desig-
         nated constables, special provincial constables, enforcement officers, railway police, private
         security firms, private investigators, and citizen volunteer groups
This list is not exhaustive but it is indicative of the scope of police protection activities in B.C. and the
arrangements for delivering the services.

Integration of specialized police activities in urban areas
To improve operational efficiency and effectiveness, especially in dealing with crimes that cross
jurisdictional boundaries, the RCMP has integrated several specialized activities in its Lower Mainland
district, which encompasses 16 detachments in the area extending to the U.S. border and the communities
of Sechelt, Pemberton, and Boston Bar. An integrated homicide investigation team (IHIT) and a
municipal-provincial auto crime team (IMPACT) have been established, both with the participation of the
independent municipal departments in the Lower Mainland. Other initiatives include:
     • Replacing five part-time emergency response teams with a public safety unit that would be a first
          responder to high-risk calls and high-profile cases like missing children
     • Consolidating 29 dog-team units into one group
     • Consolidating seven forensic identification offices into one
     • Creating a special unit to deal with computer-related crimes and child exploitation through the
          Internet
In addition, communications systems have been integrated in the Lower Mainland and Greater Victoria,
as discussed above.
     In Greater Victoria, the local independent departments have provided an integrated emergency re-
sponse team for many years and an integrated traffic law enforcement unit was created in 2005.
      The integration of police communications, information, and other specialized services, such as homi-
cide investigation and dog teams, is consistent with the point that services like these can be made more
economically efficient by taking appropriate advantage of opportunities to realize economies of scale.
Larger individual police departments have also tried to enhance their patrol and community-based liaison
activities, which do not possess scale economies, by establishing decentralized operational facilities.
However, when a single large police department attempts to do everything, it is likely to be inefficient in
some ways because the organization will be either too large or too small for some specific activities.
     An additional police force that is both integrated within an urban area and performs a special function
is the South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Police Service (SCBCTAPS), mentioned in
Chapter 5. This force is integrated into the communications and emergency systems of the Lower
Mainland, and while focusing primarily on safety and security related to TransLink, the officers have full
peace officer status. As of 2007, the force had 121 officers.

Police service performance
Police services are the most difficult local government service to evaluate because they involve face-to-
face interaction between citizens and police officers. Quality is critical to any evaluation, but there is no
easy measure for it. Furthermore, many citizen-police interactions, and the quality of those interactions,
go unreported. Typically, these interactions occur when a citizen may be stopped by or may ask a
question of a police officer, even though the police do record calls for service and summarize stops and
arrests. Also, some crimes simply go unreported by citizens.
    Many police performance measures, particularly those that track such outcomes as crime clearance
rates, are subject to environmental influences that affect how successful they are. Reported crime rates are
a good example of a performance measure that depends in part on how communities interact with the
police. Where citizens have confidence in them, the proportion of incidents that actually get reported will
