106    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   likely increase and agency data will reflect a higher crime rate there than in areas where police are less
   trusted or viewed as less effective.
        Changes in crime rates can also reflect changes in the way police departments classify incidents,
   although this is more likely to be an issue for minor offences than for major ones. Thus, when using
   police agency statistics to develop and report performance measures, it is important to keep in mind that
   time-related trends and even comparisons among police departments can be influenced by a combination
   of factors, at least some of which the police may not control.
        The most important statistics identified for evaluating policing include:
        • population-related variables, including household size, family income, median age, and popula-
            tion density;
        • the percentage of the population that owns their own home, whether the homes are single family
            or apartments, and the length of time they have resided in the area; and
        • the proportion of nonresidential property and its nature.
   These variables are all associated with public safety regardless of the performance of the police.
       An important outcome of policing is how safe people feel and how safe they and their property actu-
   ally are. The best approach to evaluating this outcome is to conduct careful citizen surveys. Among the
   variables measured in a citizen survey are: actual victimization rates (not just the incidents reported to
   police, but those that are not reported); assists by the police; stops by the police; citizen knowledge of
   police officers; and perceptions of police performance.
       There is a variety of input measures from which one can develop technical efficiency or cost-
   effectiveness indicators, remembering that environmental factors and/or the accuracy of agency data may
   need to be considered as well. Some of these measures include:
       • population per police officer;
       • cost per police officer; and
       • proportion of police personnel on the street.
   These kinds of measures can be combined with data on the number of reported crimes of different kinds
   and the number of cases cleared to produce useful indicators of technical efficiency and/or cost-
   effectiveness. The numbers of reported crimes and cases cleared, which can also be compared with each
   other, are the most commonly used statistics in this context.
        One can also compare victimization rates derived from surveys with crime rates from agency statis-
   tics to obtain a measure that at least partially reflects citizens’ trust and confidence in the police. There are
   also measures for indirect activities (those services provided to other police and not directly to citizens),
   such as the cost of processing fingerprints, the cost per test of matching DNA samples, or the cost per
   dispatch of a dispatching centre.
        Much of the available statistical data can be found in an annual report on police and crime in B.C.
   published by the ministry responsible for police services. The statistics are largely based on detailed data
   from the national Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Survey developed by Statistics Canada, but they also
   include population, police strength, and cost data for each jurisdiction.
        Comparisons among police departments are often used to benchmark crime rates and other perform-
   ance measures. It is important that statistics be uniform (some U.S. states require auditing on police
   department statistics just as they do their finances) and that different environmental factors be taken into
   account. If surveys are used, they should ask questions about specific incidents (victimization, reporting,
   and follow-up) and not just opinions of quality because citizens in different jurisdictions may have
   different expectation or benchmarks against which their “quality” responses are based.
        Ideally, to supplement agency data and survey responses for a full evaluation, it is useful to collect
   data on unobtrusive measures such as the number of times a patrol car passes a known problem area
