                                                                                    PROTECTIVE SERVICES         107


during 24 hours without the officers knowing it is being counted. This provides data from three different
sources: citizens, the agency, and field observers. If this data is consistent, analysts can be more comfort-
able with their conclusions than if any single source of information is relied upon.
    Stating performance objectives has become a common practice in independent police departments in
B.C. but the objectives tend to be stated in general terms, such as “improve clearance rates,” rather than in
clearly measurable terms, such as “increase clearance rates for person crimes by 10 percent in the next
two years.”

Observations on police protection
Since the 1980s, the community-based policing model has become generally accepted by local police
forces in B.C. The model emphasizes the idea of a partnership between the police and the public in
promoting community safety and security, notwithstanding the fact that the RCMP has a more militaristic
structure and a history of serving as an agent of the federal government. It is the community-based
policing philosophy that makes citizen surveys on interactions important in evaluating police services.
     While the RCMP attempts to adjust to the scale of different activities within a very large bureaucracy,
it does enter into cooperative arrangements with the independent departments, some of which are
described above. A significant benefit to municipalities from contracting with the RCMP is the federal
share in its pricing.
     In contrast to the RCMP, independent police departments begin with police patrol and use a variety of
relationships with other organizations to provide policing services to their citizens. This kind of dynamic,
polycentric system, where changes occur in relation to changes in technology and opportunities to be
more cost-effective on specific activities, is consistent with the prevailing system of local government
organization and operation in British Columbia.


7.2     Fire Protection
Historically, fire protection has been a principal concern wherever there have been populated settlements.
People’s lives, homes, and places of business are important and people want to protect them as best they
can. Consequently, communities have arranged to protect themselves and their properties from fire by
establishing specialized fire protection organizations and investing in the equipment needed for those
organizations to do their jobs.
    In addition to establishing fire protection organizations, other efforts have been made to reduce the
likelihood of fires starting in the first place or, if a fire does start, from spreading. These efforts include
provincial government fire and building codes and local government regulations and zoning bylaws to
require less combustible buildings, fire-resistant barriers, substantial spaces between buildings, the
installation of sprinkler systems, and routes for readily escaping from a burning building. People also
protect their investments in their buildings by insuring them against loss by fire. All of these things can be
regarded as a community’s collective investment in its fire protection system. At the heart of the system is
the organization that the community has established as its primary agent of fire protection.

The nature of fire protection service
Like police protection, a fire protection service is a public good. Where the service is provided, all of the
citizens in the area benefit. In comparison to police protection, however, the fire protection function is a
relatively simple one. In general, it consists of two main activities, fire inspection and fire suppression,
but it also includes such other activities as fire prevention education, investigating the causes of fires,
emergency planning, and responding to other emergencies, such as vehicle accidents and incidents
involving hazardous materials (hazmat). Like police patrol, fire protection is a relatively labour-intensive
