108    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   function although for small volunteer departments the cost of fire-suppression equipment may be the
   largest expenditure.
        Fire inspection involves the training of inspectors and periodic inspections of buildings such as
   schools, theatres, hotels, office buildings, and apartment buildings. Inspections involve face-to-face
   interaction and are relatively easy to plan and undertake on a regular basis. Fire inspectors also undertake
   educational and other fire prevention activities.
        Fire suppression involves training and equipment to extinguishing unwanted fires. Responding
   quickly is an important element of successful suppression and response time is considered to be a main
   criterion of performance. The activity is a discontinuous one, since fires do not occur every day in an area
   but when there is one, the firefighters become engaged in an intensive, possibly life-threatening situation.
   Fire-suppression forces also respond to other emergencies, such as when they bring the “jaws of life” to a
   car accident, and may also take part in fire inspection and equipment maintenance activities. Fire-
   suppression forces save lives and get involved in other face-to-face interactions with citizens faced with
   loss due to fire, flood, and other emergency events, reflecting its primary role of protecting life and
   property.
        The local environment affects the nature of both the inspection and suppression services that are
   required, much as the unique characteristics of individual communities affect policing needs. Different
   kinds of training and equipment are necessary, depending on whether the area is open rural, forested,
   suburban, commercial, heavily industrial, or a high-density urban area with multistorey buildings. Each
   environment involves special demands for fire inspection and suppression. In addition, different
   components of fire protection possess different scale economies. Because response time is so important,
   fire suppression is best performed by local departments in geographically limited service areas. In
   contrast, activities such as training or arson investigation can be provided for a much larger area. Local
   governments meet these demands with a variety of organizational arrangements.

   The fire service provision framework
  Local fire services are provided by municipalities, improvement districts, and regional districts. There are
  more than 400 fire departments in the province. They are one of the three most common functions for
  improvement districts but are increasingly organized as service areas within regional districts.
       While provincial legislation does not require it, B.C. municipalities generally establish their own fire
  departments. Departments with paid full-time staff, other than the chief, must comply with the Fire
  Department Act, and the powers that a council or board may authorize its fire chief to exercise are
  prescribed in the Community Charter and Local Government Act. In urban areas, the service is typically
  supplemented through mutual aid agreements among neighbouring municipalities to render assistance to
  each other free of charge. A municipality with a large land area might establish several fire halls to serve
  the whole area adequately.
       The provision of fire inspection services is mandated for municipalities under the Fire Services Act,
  which requires the regular inspection of certain classes of structures, such as places of public assembly.
  All municipalities must appoint a local assistant to the provincial fire commissioner, who is responsible
  for inspections and investigations. If the municipality has a fire department, it is likely that the fire chief
  will be appointed as the fire commissioner’s assistant, but any number of officials, including the chief
  administrator or engineer, may hold the position. In unincorporated areas that have been organized for fire
  protection through an improvement district or a service area within a regional district, an official of the
  fire department will fill this role. Inspections may be assisted by the provincial fire commissioner and
  training is often provided by Justice Institute of British Columbia, College of the Rockies, Vancouver
  Island University (formerly Malaspina College), or similar training provider.
