                                                                                    PROTECTIVE SERVICES         109


    The local individuals responsible for fire protection policymaking vary. A municipality may make a
committee of council responsible for the department or the fire chief may report directly to the chief
administrator. In an improvement district, decisions are made by the elected trustees. A department in a
regional district service area is overseen by a committee that normally includes the director for the
electoral area in which the department is located. Fire services are largely financed by property taxes, and
capital expenditures requiring tax increases in an improvement district or regional district service area are
generally subject to a vote of the taxpayers. Local officials also interact with provincial officials for
interface fires under the Wildfire Act and local planning and zoning must consider mitigating the effect of
interface fires.

Fire service production arrangements
Fire service production arrangements vary from community to community. The inspection service must
be delivered by a trained appointed assistant to the provincial fire commissioner. This is usually the fire
chief but in a large urban department, inspection services may be performed by a chief fire prevention
officer assisted by a small staff of other inspectors, as well as by fire-suppression personnel. The
inspection staff may also conduct investigations and deliver educational programs to school and
community groups. Where arson is suspected, the police department will take part in the investigation.
    Fire-suppression services may be delivered by an own-forces department with full-time paid employ-
ees, by a brigade consisting entirely of volunteers (technically part-time paid), or by a mixture of full-time
employees and volunteers. Wherever a service is provided, WorkSafeBC (the Workers’ Compensation
Board) requires that fire-resistive clothing be worn when suppressing fires.
    In general, the larger the population served and the higher the density of industrial, commercial and
high-rise building uses, the more likely it is that the fire department will consist of full-time paid
employees. The more rural the area and the lower the density, the more likely it is that the department will
consist of volunteers. Many medium-sized municipalities are served by mixed full-time and volunteer
departments.
    Both full-time and volunteer firefighters may also be called upon to perform other tasks, such as
conducting inspections, maintaining equipment, and responding to a variety of calls for other kinds of
emergency service. If highly trained specialists are needed to deal with incidents, such as those involving
hazardous materials, a fire department that does not have such people may contract for the service with
one that does. In full-time departments, the firefighters are typically organized like police department
members, with four platoons working on an eight-day cycle, including two 10-hour day shifts, two 14-
hour night shifts, and four days off.
    Not all fire services are delivered by own forces. They may also be produced by a private company or
purchased from an adjacent department, as is sometimes done by improvement districts, regional district
service areas, or First Nations. Training of fire-suppression personnel is provided by a number of
agencies, such as the Justice Institute of B.C. and the Vancouver Island Emergency Response Academy.
    Fire department emergency services are usually requested by a person triggering a fire alarm or call-
ing 9-1-1. The call may be prompted by a fire, a medical emergency, or a need for assistance in rescue,
bylaw enforcement, or other situations where a fire department’s abilities are useful. It could also be one
of the false alarms that can account for a substantial share of the calls. When there is a traffic accident,
both the provincial ambulance service and a fire department “first responder” may be called because the
employees of both agencies have the appropriate training in treating victims at the scene of an accident
and response time may be critical to saving a life.
    In addition to prevention and suppression personnel, a fire department may employ such support staff
as alarm operators or dispatchers, equipment mechanics, and administrative personnel. Where there is a
9-1-1 system, the dispatch system is tied into it. Every department has at least one fire station, at least one
