                                                                                                                 PROTECTIVE SERVICES                111


     Many more measures than those shown in Exhibit 7–2 could be calculated, but it is necessary to
understand the environmental factors in a jurisdiction and then select the measures that are most
important for that jurisdiction. Most performance measures result from a combination of an environ-
mental factor and fire department activity. For example, response time is related to the geographic size of
the jurisdiction as well as the quickness of the fire department, and the number and kind of fires is related
to the number and age of structures as well as the effectiveness of educational programs and inspections.
Over time there should be a decline in structural and unoccupied land fires if educational programs are
effective, and a reduction in structural fires if inspections are effective. Over longer periods, a decline in
structural fires could also be attributed to the replacement of older buildings by newer ones that meet
more stringent fire codes.
     The most important outcome measures are the number of injuries and fatalities due to fires (including
firefighters and citizens) and the value of fire losses in relation to the assessed value of structures. These
measures can be related to costs and compared with other fire service organizations but they are pretty
general. Managers interested in improving their performance will need to look at more detailed measures,
including the number of people manning stations at different times of day, and their ability to respond
with appropriate-sized trucks.21 Most departments can produce these statistics if requested.
     An interesting measure of cost-effectiveness could be based on the estimated cost of what individual
citizens would pay for fire insurance if there was no fire department. The difference between the increase
in insurance costs and the taxes paid for fire services can provide an indication of the net benefit they
receive from the community’s fire protection system.


7.3        Emergency Protection
Police and fire protection organizations, along with many others, must be prepared to deal with more far-
reaching emergencies or disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, volcanic eruptions, chemical spills, major
explosions, and major accidents. Every year, more than 7,000 incidents, such as landslides, floods,
interface fires, oil spills, and persons needing rescue are reported to the provincial emergency coordina-
tion centre. The responses to most of the incidents, such as those that involve land or water search-and-
rescue operations, are managed locally but there have also been some major events in British Columbia.
These include the 1964 tsunami that devastated parts of Port Alberni, the heavy snowfall that paralyzed
the Lower Mainland and Greater Victoria for over a week in 1996–97, the 2003 firestorm that destroyed
244 homes in the Kelowna area, and the 2007–08 ice-jam flooding in Prince George.
    To provide for such events, the provincial government has established a province-wide emergency
program that supports municipal and regional district emergency programs. The basic principles of
emergency management in British Columbia are that, in the first instance, it is up to each citizen to be
personally prepared for emergencies and secondly that local governments are at all times in charge of
emergency planning and response in their jurisdictions.

The nature of emergency protection
Like police and fire protection, emergency protection is a public good—it benefits society at large. It
embraces a variety of preventive, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.



21
     Statisticians can estimate the relative contribution of different environmental factors and different inputs if they have consistent information
on many fire departments. With this information a manager can compare how the department performs in comparison to other departments and
make adjustments to improve performance. Unless a provincial government requires such measures to be reported regularly, the collection of data
from the number of departments necessary for these analyses is very expensive. Even without this kind of analysis, in-house longitudinal
comparisons and comparisons with other departments where similar measures exist can help managers make improvements.
