112       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



          •   Preventive activities include building regulation, land use regulation, diking, public education,
              legislation, and the use of tax and insurance incentives and disincentives.
          •   Preparedness activities include producing emergency plans, mutual aid agreements, resource
              inventories, floodplain mapping warning procedures, training exercises, and emergency commu-
              nications systems.
          •   Response activities include implementing emergency plans, activating emergency operations
              centres, issuing warnings and directions, providing medical and social assistance to citizens, and
              declaring a state of emergency if warranted.
          •   Recovery activities include restoration, reconstruction and the provision of counselling, health
              and safety advice, temporary housing, financial assistance, and economic impact studies.
      In general, the activities tend to be labour intensive and not easy to measure but they vary in the degree to
      which they involve face-to-face interaction or impersonal delivery. The preventive and preparedness
      activities tend to be relatively continuous in nature while the response and recovery activities occur
      infrequently.

   The emergency protection provision framework
  The B.C. Emergency Program Act requires the minister, in concert with other ministers of government, to
  prepare provincial plans for emergency preparation, response, and recovery. The Act and regulations
  establish the Provincial Emergency Program (PEP) as the agency responsible for developing and
  maintaining the province’s emergency program. The Act also requires local governments and provincial
  ministries to develop emergency plans for their specific areas of responsibility. Virtually every provincial
  ministry and Crown corporation has a defined role to play in the event of an emergency and national
  parks are protected through federal-provincial agreements.
       All municipalities and regional districts in the province are required to prepare local emergency plans
  and establish emergency management organizations. Because the activities are so varied and necessarily
  entail intergovernmental cooperation, especially in an urban area, one or more local committees are
  required to help coordinate the participation of the police, fire, and other groups involved in the emer-
  gency protection function.
       When extraordinary powers are needed to deal with emergencies or disasters in the province, the
  minister or Lieutenant Governor may declare a provincial state of emergency for all or a part of the
  province. A state of local emergency may be declared by a mayor or regional board chair for all or part of
  their area of responsibility when extraordinary powers are required within a single local government
  jurisdiction. Because it is not necessary to formally declare a state of emergency to implement emergency
  plans, provincial states of emergency have only been declared twice in the history of the province, while
  states of local emergency are declared four or five times a year on average.
       Sources of funds for local emergency preparedness activities include property taxes and grants from
  senior governments. Local governments can also receive financial assistance from the province for
  eligible emergency response and recovery costs. Federal cost sharing is available to provincial ministries,
  municipalities, regional districts, and First Nations through a Joint Emergency Preparedness Program
  (JEPP) aimed at encouraging projects that support the federal government’s responsibilities respecting
  public welfare emergencies (natural or human disasters), public order emergencies (threats to Canada’s
  internal security such as insurrections or acts of terrorism), international emergencies (external threats to
  Canada or its allies), and war.

   Emergency protection production arrangements
   Local emergency plans are produced, with the advice and assistance of PEP, by local emergency
   management organizations whose size and structure vary considerably throughout the province. In a small
