                                                                                  PROTECTIVE SERVICES      113


municipality, the organization may consist of one committee supported by part-time volunteers. In a city,
it may include a number of committees and working groups supported by local government staff. Within
the framework of an overall plan, there may be separate plans for communications, policing, fire
protection, traffic control, evacuation, public works, medical health, and social service activities.
     PEP also helps local governments in testing plans, organizing volunteers, and training them at the
Emergency Management Division of the Justice Institute of B.C. While in-house and volunteer produc-
tion are the primary methods used in preparing for local emergencies, a variety of other methods,
including joint and contracted production, may be used in implementing response and recovery programs.
     About 13,000 people across the province volunteer their time and expertise in preparing for and re-
sponding to emergency situations. PEP provides support for many volunteers and also provides the
essential legal authority to recognize volunteer groups for responding to emergencies and disasters.
Registered volunteers participate in search and rescue, emergency social services, emergency radio
communications, air search and road rescue programs, and are eligible for workers’ compensation
benefits, liability insurance coverage, legal representation, and reimbursement of some expenses. Support
is also available for coordination and local training.
     To ensure effective response to emergencies, the provincial government has developed an emergency
response management system (BCERMS) that provides for four levels of response. Most incidents are
managed at the site level, where local police, fire, ambulance, and other first responders are directed by a
single or unified site commander. If the response requirements become more complex, the local emer-
gency plan is activated and an offsite emergency operations centre (EOC) is set up to manage the
situation, coordinate communications, provide policy guidance, and provide the needed resources. The
third and fourth response levels come into play when a community or significant infrastructure is
threatened by an emergency that may overwhelm a local authority’s ability to respond, in which case
provincial regional emergency operation centres (PREOC) are activated as required and the provincial
emergency coordination centre (PECC) becomes involved. If the emergency escalates beyond the
province’s capabilities, the federal government, the military, or neighbouring jurisdictions may be asked
to provide assistance under existing agreements or plans. The response can move quickly from the local
to the national level because the PECC and its federal counterpart operate continuously.

Emergency protection performance
The main question in assessing a local emergency management organization’s performance is how well
the community is prepared to respond to emergencies and how well it responds in practice. Initially,
preparedness can be measured by whether or not something has been done, such as enacting the necessary
bylaw, but it is important to measure the completeness and quality of the emergency plans, mutual aid
agreements, resource inventories, warning procedures, training exercises, emergency communications
systems, etc. At least to some extent, this can be measured with reference to PEP standards and guiding
principles but people who are relatively well informed about the function can be the most valuable source
of data about the organization’s performance in preparing the community for responding to emergencies.
Cost is usually a less important consideration here because preparedness activities are a small part of a
local government’s budget.
    When an emergency occurs, performance can be measured by response time, the treatment of im-
pacted residents, and other measures used in assessing the performance of police, fire, and other
protective services. Cost can be an important consideration when extensive local police, fire, and other
resources are spent responding to and recovering from a major event like a flood. A citizen opinion
survey can be useful in measuring the performance of the response and recovery activities in such a
situation.
