                                                                                  ENGINEERING SERVICES          115




 Chapter Eight
Engineering Services


E
        ngineering services include the water, liquid waste, solid waste, transportation system, and public
        transit services, as well as other public works. Other activities include surface water drainage and
        flood control works (ditches, culverts, flood boxes, dikes, dams, storm sewers, etc.), and
miscellaneous works such as retaining walls, seawalls, wharves, floats, and public buildings. B.C.
municipalities may provide all of these services. Regional districts and improvement districts may
provide the same services, except for roads. Public transit services are jointly provided by local govern-
ments and BC Transit, a provincial agency, or by the South Coast British Columbia Transportation
Authority (TransLink). Special-purpose local government bodies may also be involved in some engineer-
ing services, such as the Greater Vancouver Water District (GVWD) and the Greater Vancouver
Sewerage and Drainage District.
    Public works production activities include planning, design, construction, acquisition, disposition,
operation, and maintenance. Planning and design is done by specialists who may be contracted consult-
ants or local government employees. Construction, operation, and maintenance work may be done by
contractors or government employees, depending on such variables as municipal size, project size, and
regularity of production. Local government staff usually handle acquisition and disposition activities.
    With a few exceptions, other engineering services, such as electricity, gas, and telecommunications,
are provided by provincial or private agencies, whose uses of roads and other municipal properties for
their poles, wires, pipes, conduits, and other installations are regulated by the municipalities. Exceptions
include a city-owned telecommunications corporation in Prince Rupert and municipal electric utilities in
Grand Forks, Kelowna, Nelson, New Westminster, Penticton, and Summerland.
    The cities of North Vancouver and Revelstoke also established district energy utilities in 2004–05 to
provide “green” services that enhance economic efficiency, conserve energy, and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Examples of other initiatives aimed at enhancing sustainability include water conservation,
wastewater reclamation and reuse, and energy recovery from waste products.
    Some facilities, such as roads, have the characteristics of public goods, while others, such as water
and sewer utilities, do not. The services have well-defined, measurable characteristics and are generally
easier to measure, evaluate, and manage efficiently than police and fire protection services.


8.1     Water Supply

Nature of water supply services
All people, households, farms, and businesses require water. Of the various functions undertaken by local
governments in B.C., water supply is the most frequently provided. Water may be obtained from wells,
cisterns, rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, and may be delivered to households, farms, or businesses through
pipes or ditches. The quantity of water provided is easily measured, and quality (sanitation, colour, taste,
hardness, and the pressure at which it is available) is also measurable. Sanitation is important for domestic
supplies, and water may have to be treated to achieve adequate standards. Water pressure is important for
firefighting.
