116    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



        Unless a user is geographically isolated, there are likely to be significant cost savings realized from
   utilizing a common collection and delivery system. An urban water distribution system possesses the
   characteristics of a natural public utility monopoly—a single continuous set of distribution pipes can
   serve an area at lower cost than two or more overlapping systems. Other elements of an urban system
   include intakes, storage facilities, treatment facilities, pump stations, pressure-reducing stations, fire
   hydrants, connections to individual properties, and water meters. The system is measurable, capital
   intensive, impersonal, and continuously provided.

   Water supply provision
  Virtually all B.C. municipalities provide a domestic, commercial, and industrial water supply system.
  Water supply services in B.C. are also provided by about 100 regional district service area systems, over
  200 improvement districts, almost 200 private utilities, over 450 First Nation systems, and about 125
  water users’ communities, which often serve agricultural users. The variety of local agencies involved in
  water supply means that the decision-making processes also vary.
      All users and suppliers of water in B.C. must comply with provincial legislation. If water is drawn
  from a river or lake, the Water Act requires that a water licence be obtained from the environment
  ministry and that annual fees be paid for water use. Well drillers and well pump installers must meet the
  qualification and registration requirements of the Ground Water Protection Regulation. Water for
  domestic use must comply with the Drinking Water Protection Act and regulations, administered by the
  health ministry, and system operators must meet prescribed qualification standards. Where deemed
  necessary, the environment minister may require preparation of a water management plan. Decision
  making may also be influenced by bodies that provide grants for water-related facilities and projects, such
  as the municipal affairs ministry, the agriculture ministry, the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’
  Green Municipal Fund, and the Canada-B.C. Municipal Rural Infrastructure Program, all of which
  provide conditional grants to local governments.
      Some local governments have extended their water supply systems so that they control the watersheds
  from which the water is taken. Control over the watershed may be exercised through outright ownership,
  as in the Capital Regional District (CRD), or through a long-term lease, such as the 999-year lease
  between the Greater Vancouver Water District (GVWD) and the province. The CRD, the Greater
  Vancouver Regional District (GVRD), and some other local governments have also adopted conservation
  or sustainable-use policies and regulations for using water more efficiently so as to delay the need for
  investing in system expansion and reduce the load on wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal
  systems.
      A municipal or regional water supply system can entail significant capital costs, and money may have
  to be borrowed or negotiated in a public private partnership (P3) to finance construction. If so, the
  decision is subject to a referendum or alternate approval process, depending on the circumstances. The
  ongoing operation and maintenance of the system is usually financed through a combination of special
  assessments, such as parcel taxes, and user charges for water consumption, service connections, etc.

   Water supply production
   Water supply systems are usually planned and designed by consulting engineering specialists and
   constructed by private firms under contract. In some cases, local government staff may do some of the
   work, especially for smaller projects. It is common for local governments that own and operate their own
   systems to sell water to adjacent communities or to install and operate systems outside their own
   boundaries. The GVWD and CRD each functions as a wholesaler of water to local municipalities, which
   then deliver it through their municipal systems. The CRD is also the local retailer in some parts of its
   service area.
