                                                                               ENGINEERING SERVICES         117


     The operation and maintenance of municipal and regional district systems may be done by contractors
or by government employees, supplemented by contracted services on a project basis. Many improvement
districts rely on volunteer labour for small construction jobs and system maintenance. Other activities
include measuring consumption, billing, and collecting for the service. Because of the ease of measure-
ment and the impersonal nature of service delivery, water supply system activities are easily managed and
easily dealt with on a contractual basis.

Water supply service performance
The measures used to assess the performance of a water supply system are concerned primarily with
water quality and operational efficiency. Where the system supplies drinking water, its quality is
measured by provincial standards based on the biological, chemical, radiological, and aesthetic parame-
ters contained in Health Canada’s Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality. For other purposes
including aquatic life, wildlife, aesthetic, recreation, irrigation, livestock watering, and industrial
activities, various biological, chemical, and physical quality guidelines administered by the environment
ministry are used to measure water quality. Where the measured concentration of a substance exceeds the
guideline, an overall quality assessment may be conducted.
     A water utility uses many operational efficiency measures to monitor its performance over time.
These range from general measures, such as total annual operating cost per megalitre, to specific activity
measures, such as percentage of hydrants serviced per year, or number of water meters read per week.
Sources of information about water utility performance measurement and/or best practices include the
British Columbia Water and Waste Association (BCWWA), the Canadian Water and Wastewater
Association (CWWA), and the American Water Works Association (AWWA), which conducts a
benchmarking program in cooperation with the Water Environment Federation (WEF). More than 200
North American utility organizations participate in the program, including the CRD, the GVWD, and Sun
Peaks Utilities Co. Ltd. in British Columbia.
     The AWWA benchmarking program involves periodic surveys of the participants in which data are
collected for over 300 items related to 22 performance indicators in the areas of organizational develop-
ment, customer relations, business operations, water operations, and wastewater operations, as shown in
Exhibit 8–1. Based on this information, the AWWA publishes statistical reports that a utility can use to
compare its own performance with the average for its peer group.
     The performance of water conservation initiatives can be measured in various ways. The AWWA
recommends water volume per customer account per day, broken down by class of account. Measures
used by the CRD in measuring the performance of its demand side management (DSM) program include
percentage changes in per capita demand and the number of rebates issued per year under programs for
promoting the use of low-flow residential toilet fixtures, low-flow shower heads, high-efficiency washing
machines, and more efficient automatic irrigation systems. Some of these measures, such as low-flow
residential toilets, are now required in B.C. Measures used by the GVRD with respect to its sustainable-
use objective include percentage changes in per capita water consumption by residential customers, by all
customers, and by all customers on peak days. The sustainability of water and wastewater services is
further discussed in Section 8.2 below.
