118    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA




      EXHIBIT 8–1: WATERWORKS UTILITY PERFORMANCE MEASURES

      ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
       1. Organizational best practices index. Self-assessment of the degree to which a utility implements strategic
          planning, long-term financial planning, risk management planning, optimized asset management, perform-
          ance measurement, customer involvement, and continuous improvement practices.
       2. Employee health and safety severity rate. Lost workdays per employee per year.
       3. Training hours per employee.
       4. Employee efficiency. Customer accounts per employee. Million gallons (3.7854 megalitres) of water
          delivered per employee. Million gallons (3.7854 megalitres) of wastewater processed per employee.

      CUSTOMER RELATIONS
       5. Customer service complaints and technical quality complaints per 1,000 customer accounts.
       6. Number of customers experiencing service disruptions per 1,000 active customer accounts.
       7. Residential cost of water and/or sewer service. Monthly bill amount for residential water and/or sewer
          service for a customer using 7,500 gallons (28,391 litres) per month. Average residential water and/or
          sewer bill amount per month.
       8. Customer service cost per account per year.
       9. Billing accuracy. Number of error-driven bill adjustments per 10,000 bills issued during the reporting year.

      BUSINESS OPERATIONS
      10. Debt ratio.
      11. System renewal-replacement rates for the water treatment, water distribution, wastewater collection, and
          wastewater treatment infrastructure components.
      12. Return on assets.

      WATER OPERATIONS
      13. Drinking water compliance rate. Percentage of days per year in full compliance with mandated maximum
          contaminant levels and treatment techniques.
      14. Distribution system water loss. Percentage of drinking water placed into distribution that does not reach
          customers or other authorized users.
      15. Water distribution system integrity. Number of breaks and leaks requiring repair per 100 miles (161
          kilometres) of distribution piping.
      16. Cost of operations and maintenance per million gallons (3.7854 megalitres) of water produced. Cost per
          account.
      17. Ratio of planned maintenance to corrective maintenance activities. Proposed ratios compare costs and
          hours invested in planned and corrective maintenance activities.

      WASTEWATER OPERATIONS
      18. Sewer overflow rate. Number of overflows per 100 miles of collection piping.
      19. Collection system integrity. Frequency of collection system failures per 100 miles (161 kilometres) of
          piping.
      20. Wastewater treatment effectiveness rate. Percentage of time that an individual wastewater treatment
          facility is in full compliance with applicable effluent quality requirements.
      21. Cost of operations and maintenance per million gallons (3.7854 megalitres) of wastewater processed.
          Cost per account.
      22. Ratio of planned maintenance to corrective maintenance activities. Proposed ratios compare costs and
          hours invested in planned and corrective maintenance activities.

      Source: American Water Works Association website.
