                                                                                ENGINEERING SERVICES      119


8.2     Liquid Waste Management

Nature of liquid waste management
Liquid wastes include piped wastewater that has been used for household, business, or industrial
purposes; surface runoff water that has been polluted by chemicals, oils, or other contaminants; used
chemicals; and other unwanted fluids. Some fluids are hazardous and subject to special programs and
regulations, such as source control measures. Wastewater disposal is handled by various kinds of septic
and sewage systems. In urban areas, these may include separate sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems
or, in some older areas, combined sanitary and storm systems. Because combined systems can present
hazards to public health if sewers overflow after a heavy rainfall, they are no longer built. Existing ones
are gradually being replaced by separate systems.
     Common methods for disposing of household liquid wastes in less populated areas include draining
them into a holding tank, from which the contents are periodically emptied and transported to a treatment
facility, or into a septic tank, where they are broken down biologically and discharged through a porous
tile field into the ground. As long as the soil is permeable, the groundwater level is not too high, and
sufficient distance is maintained from wells and water bodies, septic tanks are safe and efficient. Where
soils are impermeable, or water tables are high, or an area is heavily populated, septic tanks may pose
hazards to human health and alternate methods must be used.
     Technologies for composting and incinerating human waste, with simple filter treatments of grey
water, have been used in other countries for many years. In B.C. the preference has been for waterborne
systems that reduce the high biological oxygen demands of organic wastes and eliminate harmful
pathogens prior to discharge into rivers, lakes, or saltwater bodies. The main components of these systems
are collector pipes through which the sewage flows by gravity, pumping stations that lift it up where
required, treatment plants that remove solid contaminants, and outfalls through which the treated effluent
is discharged.
     Like a water supply system, an urban sanitary sewage system is an example of a capital-intensive
utility that functions most efficiently as a single system. It is impersonal in nature and has easily
measurable characteristics. While there appear to be few, if any, economies of scale in constructing and
operating collection systems, there may be some scale economies within a given system—short, fat pipes
are cheaper to install per unit of sewage volume than long, thin ones. On the other hand, significant
economies of scale are achievable in treatment plant operations—larger treatment plants can deal with
waste at a lower average unit cost than smaller ones. It is not always possible to have large treatment
plants, however, because the costs of pipe and pumping increase with distance, offsetting potential
savings. Efficient systems will vary in size and configuration, depending on population locations and the
terrain over which the sewage must be pumped.
     Storm sewer systems are simpler than sanitary systems, draining watersheds entirely by gravity
through pipes or open channels, such as ditches or creeks, and eventually discharging stormwater through
a relatively short outfall. Stormwater from paved areas drains into catch basins, which collect some of the
contaminants in sumps. To reduce the volume of stormwater runoff, techniques such as permeable
pavement and retention ponds may be used. Concerns about pollution of the receiving environment by
stormwater contaminants have led some jurisdictions to introduce stormwater treatment units that trap the
contaminants before the water is discharged.

Liquid waste service provision
The central pieces of provincial legislation regulating the collection, treatment, and disposal of liquid
wastes include the Environmental Management Act, the Municipal Sewage Regulation and, for smaller
