120    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   systems, the Sewerage System Regulation of the Health Act. While it is not mandatory for local govern-
   ments to provide sanitary sewage systems, it would be virtually impossible for a densely populated area to
   comply with provincial health and pollution regulations without having one. Subdivision control bylaws
   in urban areas normally require the installation of sewer systems.
        To reduce the use of sewage systems for disposing of paint, solvents, gasoline, pharmaceuticals,
   domestic pesticides, and other hazardous liquid wastes, the provincial government has introduced
   programs that require the producers and users of these liquids to take responsibility for controlling the
   wastes. Special arrangements are also made for disposing biomedical wastes.
        Recycling sewage sludge (biosolids) must comply with the Organic Matter Recycling Regulation,
   whose purpose is to address the risks involved in such recycled uses as landfill reclamation, mine
   reclamation, silviculture applications, composting, the production of dry fertilizer products for retail sales,
   and spreading liquefied treatment plant sludge on farmland. If the sludge still contains highly concen-
   trated contaminants, they could be transported to plants, animals, birds, groundwater, wells, stockponds,
   surface waters, and ultimately to the food we eat.
        The environment ministry may require a municipality or regional district to prepare a liquid waste
   management plan (LWMP) for dealing with sewage discharges, combined sewer overflows, urban
   stormwater runoff, sewage sludge management, pump station overflows, subdivisions with onsite
   disposal, source control programs, and effluent. The LWMP must be prepared in consultation with a
   provincially designated waste manager and be consistent with the ministry’s long-term waste manage-
   ment objectives. When approved by the minister, it becomes the authority under which the operational
   arrangements are made for disposing of liquid wastes in the jurisdiction.
        Nearly all municipalities, more than half the regional districts and some improvement districts have
   LWMPs or liquid waste management systems of some kind. New systems or extensions of existing
   systems are usually planned and designed in cooperation with the municipal affairs and environment
   ministries, to be sure that all permit and financing requirements are met. System construction and
   operation are undertaken under permits issued by the environment ministry.
        As with water supply, a municipal or regional sewage system entails significant capital costs, and
   money may have to be borrowed or negotiated in a P3 to finance construction. If so, the decision is
   normally subject to a referendum or alternative approval process except where the minister has ordered
   the work, as has happened in the CRD. Conditional grants are usually available to assist with financing.
   The ongoing operation and maintenance of a sanitary sewage system is usually financed through a
   combination of special assessments, connection fees, and user charges based on water consumption.

   Liquid waste production
   Sewage systems are usually planned and designed by consulting engineering specialists. The collection,
   treatment, and disposal facilities are virtually always constructed by private contractors. Once construc-
   tion is complete, the local government may operate and maintain the system either with its own
   employees or by contracting out. Most local governments in B.C. operate their own systems, do their own
   minor maintenance, and contract out larger maintenance projects. This permits the local government to
   operate with a small, efficient permanent staff.
        While most municipalities operate complete systems, some manage only the local collection of sew-
   age, with the regional district or another municipality handling regional collection, treatment, and disposal
   of the waste. This division of activities can be just as efficient as having one organization manage the
   entire operation since there appear to be few, if any, economies of scale in constructing and operating
   collection systems, as noted above.
