                                                                                  ENGINEERING SERVICES       121


Liquid waste service performance
The measures used to monitor the performance of a liquid waste management system are concerned
primarily with effluent water quality and operational efficiency. Sewage sludge quality is also measured
by such criteria as its suitability for processing and recycling as fertilizer.
     Effluent quality measures include flow rate, biological oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids
(TSS), fecal coliform density and the extent to which other pollutants are present. They must comply with
the standards in the environment ministry’s the Municipal Sewage Regulation and, for small system
effluent discharged into the ground, the health ministry’s Sewerage System Standard Practice Manual. In
general, effluent discharged into a water body that also serves as a source of drinking water must meet
stricter quality standards than effluent discharged into a reclaimed grey water system or a saltwater body.
More restrictive standards apply in areas such as the Okanagan basin and the Abbotsford-Sumas aquifer,
where levels of phosphorus or nitrogen are of critical importance, or areas such as Saanich Inlet and
Shuswap Lake, where effluent can only be discharged if an environmental impact assessment demon-
strates it would not harm the receiving waters.
     The CRD and GVRD discharge systems each provides for a trigger process in which remedial action
is taken whenever the level of a contaminant detected in the effluent, water column, sediment, or biota at
the end of an outfall is found to exceed prescribed quality standards. Because the strong flushing action of
the currents in the Strait of Juan de Fuca were considered to provide a kind of natural treatment effect, the
CRD was permitted to discharge screened but otherwise untreated sewage through two outfalls into the
strait for many years. In 2006, the B.C. environment minister decided that levels of contamination in
sediments near the outfalls were unacceptable and treatment was required, notwithstanding the fact that
the trigger standards had not been exceeded.
     Like a water utility, a sewer utility can use a variety of operational efficiency measures to monitor its
performance, ranging from total annual operating cost per megalitre of effluent to specific measures, such
as percentage reduction of mercury attributable to a source control program. Sources of information about
sewer utility performance measurement and/or best practices include the BCWWA, the CWWA, and the
AWWA, whose benchmarking program uses the performance indicators listed in Exhibit 8–1.
     Since 2000, the sustainable performance of local water and wastewater management services in B.C.
has been a primary focus of various programs financed by senior governments, several of which were
brought together in a Canada-British Columbia Infrastructure Framework Agreement in 2007. These
programs have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in projects for improving water supply systems,
wastewater systems, water conservation, and water reuse practices. The B.C. government requires the use
of a P3 model as a procurement base case if provincial contributions to a project exceed $20 million.
     Initially, the Canada-B.C. Infrastructure Program emphasized investments in water supply system
improvements, reflecting public concerns that had been heightened by the widely reported loss of life
from the contamination of Walkerton, Ontario’s drinking water in 2000. There was justification for the
concerns. Of the more than 3,300 water supply systems in B.C., almost 10 percent were under boil-water
advisories in 2001 and a 1996 report on the state of Canada’s municipal infrastructure had stated that the
average age of B.C.’s water supply systems exceeded their expected life spans. The passage of the
Drinking Water Protection Act in 2001 was a direct response to this situation.
     The funding programs have also encouraged the reclamation and reuse of wastewater from sewage
treatment plants for agricultural, industrial, or other uses that pose no risk to public health. This can be
particularly advantageous where the demand for potable water supplied through a conventional system is
significantly reduced by replacing it with grey water and/or where the impact of the treatment plant
effluent on the receiving environment is an important consideration. For example, in 1977 the City of
Vernon began treating and reusing the wastewater from its sewage treatment plant for irrigating
