122    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   rangeland, playing fields, golf courses, and tree nurseries. As a result, Vernon virtually eliminated the
   discharge of effluent from its plant into Lake Okanagan and reduced its estimated water and wastewater
   capital expenditures by about 50 percent over a 20-year period.
        In addition to a focus on recycling waste water, the impacts of the conventional waterborne sewage
   systems with centralized treatment plants that are common in B.C. have come under scrutiny. While the
   disposal of sewage sludge can be an issue, there is also evidence that endocrine disruptors and other
   pharmaceuticals in treatment plant effluent may adversely affect the sexual and other biological character-
   istics of fish in the receiving waters. This phenomenon has prompted scientific study but the implications
   are not yet clear.


   8.3     Solid Waste Management

   Nature of solid waste management
   Households, businesses, and industry produce a variety of solid wastes, many with the potential to
   generate fire, health, and/or nuisance problems. These wastes include domestic refuse, bulky household
   items such as appliances or furniture, building rubble, tires, batteries, junk automobiles, animal carcasses,
   septic tank residues, sewage treatment sludge, contaminated soil, biomedical wastes, toxic chemicals, and
   radioactive wastes from hospitals and laboratories. The wastes must be collected from the waste-
   generating sites and transported to disposal or recycling facilities for processing.
        Local governments are usually heavily involved with residential waste collection and disposal. They
   may also have programs that promote composting and/or recycling reclaimable waste collected by
   recycling crews or delivered by individuals to recycling centres. Single-family residential waste collection
   in urban areas is most efficient when a single truck and crew collect from every house along a street, so
   local governments normally make exclusive collection arrangements for these areas. Such arrangements,
   without the expense of individual household billing, are not only efficient but tend to be more popular
   than other options.
        The collection of other kinds of waste often requires specialized equipment and maintaining exclusive
   area collection becomes less important than using the most efficient equipment. Apartment blocks and
   business establishments are best served by larger trucks and bins but access problems in older areas may
   limit them to using small bins and cans. Other wastes, such as construction rubble, biomedical wastes,
   toxic substances, radioactive materials, animals, junk automobiles, sewage sludge, and contaminated soil
   require even more specialized arrangements.
        As urban areas have grown, the distances between collection areas and disposal sites have increased.
   Thus it is sometimes more efficient for collection vehicles to dump their loads into larger trucks at
   transfer stations rather than make the long drive to a disposal site. Special methods are also used for
   radioactive and toxic materials because not every area has the proper facilities to dispose of them. Local
   government involvement in these processes is minimal. Collection, hauling, and disposal are organized by
   provincial and federal agencies.
        Local governments also provide landfill sites and incinerators to dispose of solid waste. Because
   landfill sites may contaminate groundwater supplies and incinerators may cause air pollution, they are
   subject to provincial regulations. Due to these and other constraints, the number of landfill sites in B.C.
   declined from 236 in 1988 to 112 in 2005, and all municipal solid waste incinerators were closed except
   for the GVRD waste-to-energy facility in Burnaby. In most cases, a leachate management system has had
   to be installed in a landfill to ensure ground and surface water quality. On the other hand, fewer than 10 of
   the 112 landfills in 2005 had biogas management systems, in which the collected gases are flared to
   reduce odours and greenhouse gas emissions or recovered for beneficial uses of their energy.
