                                                                                                              ENGINEERING SERVICES                123


     Because British Columbia landfills must satisfy rigorous criteria, large regional landfills have been
gradually replacing older facilities. The larger operations can achieve economies of scale that help offset
the costs of meeting regulatory criteria. They are typically operated through contracts with specialized
firms and can be located far from the areas they serve. For example, some GVRD waste has been shipped
to Cache Creek, about 330 kilometres northeast of Vancouver, and it has been proposed to ship it by rail
to large landfills as far away as Fort St. John, central Alberta, and Washington State.
     Solid waste management differs from many other government services because it is possible to iden-
tify precisely who generates the waste and who is responsible for having it collected or recycled. The
process can be readily measured, such as the number of households served and the number of tonnes of
different kinds of waste collected and disposed of. This permits a comparison of performance with
alternative organizational arrangements, management strategies and technologies.
     Solid waste management can involve face-to-face interaction when it involves individual delivery to a
recycling centre, such as the one on Hornby Island where used goods are also exchanged through a
community “free store.” Otherwise, it is an impersonal service whose value is not dependent on face-to-
face interaction between the waste collector and the citizen. The ability to quantify and the impersonal
nature of production means that local governments may choose from a wider variety of approaches for
producing the service than they can with services like policing and fire protection.

Solid waste service provision
As with liquid wastes, the Environmental Management Act and regulations are the central pieces of
provincial legislation regulating solid waste management. The Act and its Contaminated Sites Regulation
also deal extensively with the identification and remediation of brownfield sites polluted by industrial or
other activities, including the relocation of contaminated soil from the sites. Other relevant provincial
legislation includes the fire hazard provisions of the Fire Services Act, the public health provisions of the
Public Health Act, the regional district powers described in the Local Government Act, and the municipal
powers described in the Community Charter. An improvement district may be empowered to arrange for
solid waste management by its letters patent.
     Since 1982, the provincial government has become increasingly involved in waste management pro-
grams that emphasize “the five Rs”—reduction, reuse, recycling, recovery, and residual management.
They include industry product stewardship programs for batteries, beverage containers, electronics,
filters, flammable liquids, gasoline, lubricating oil, medications, paint, pesticides, solvents, and tires, as
well as regulations for composting and applying organic matter on land.
     In 1989, the province required all regional districts to prepare solid waste management plans (SWMP)
and submit them for approval by 1995. As with liquid wastes, a SWMP must be prepared in consultation
with a provincially designated waste manager and must cover the collection, transportation, handling,
storage, treatment, recycling, and disposal of municipal and other solid wastes. The province also set a
goal of reducing the amount of municipal solid waste22 disposed of in B.C. landfills and incinerators by
the year 2000 to 50 percent of the 1990 per capita amount. Stringent criteria were introduced for
incinerator emissions in 1991 and for landfills in 1993, including detailed provisions regarding leachate
and gas management, prohibited wastes, open-burning restrictions, closure procedures, etc.
     All regional districts, most municipalities and some improvement districts are involved in solid waste
management to some degree. Municipal involvement can be extensive, with all residential and commer-
cial waste collection and recycling being financed by property taxes or compulsory user charges. While
22
       The Environmental Management Act defines municipal solid waste (MSW) as: (a) refuse that originates from residential, commercial,
institutional, demolition, land-clearing, or construction (DLC) sources, or (b) refuse specified by a director to be included in a waste management
plan. It implicitly excludes sewage sludge, agricultural waste, and industrial wood waste. Before 1989, the definition of MSW did not include
DLC wastes.
