124    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   recycling programs would ideally operate on a cost-recovery basis, some subsidization from general tax
   revenues may be needed. Senior governments may also provide grants to help finance recycling and other
   programs with environmental sustainability objectives. Regional districts tend to get most involved in
   managing collection contracts in some rural areas, providing disposal sites and regulating privately owned
   recycling and disposal facilities.

   Solid waste service production
   At least four different production arrangements and combinations of them are used by B.C. local
   governments for residential solid waste collection:
      • Own-forces production by municipal employees
      • Contracted production by private companies
      • Exclusive area franchises, in which a single firm produces the service for a regulated price
      • Licensing of private collectors who make independent arrangements with individual customers
   The production options for recycling programs are similar.
        The operation of transfer stations, transportation from transfer stations to disposal sites, and disposal
   site management are done either by local government employees or private contractors. Two or more
   local governments may also enter into a joint arrangement for managing a disposal site. Contractual
   arrangements with private companies for service delivery are used extensively because performance can
   be measured and contracts for production can be easily written.
        Of the various options available for different kinds of waste collection, it appears that the more uni-
   form the type of service, such as single-family residential waste collection, the more likely it is that the
   local government will be directly involved in service production, contracting, or franchising. Otherwise,
   local governments tend to limit their involvement to regulatory activity, and the waste generators and
   collectors make private arrangements. Even in some suburban residential areas, waste collection may
   simply be left up to individual residents and competing private companies.

   Solid waste service performance
   Considerable research has been conducted on the performance of solid waste management services in the
   United States and Canada. A primary source of information about best practices, standards, and innova-
   tions is the Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA), which has chapters all over the
   continent and is involved in a variety of educational, certification, advocacy, and other activities.
       The primary measures used in assessing the performance of solid waste management operational
   activities are cost per tonne and, for residential collection and recycling activities, cost per household.
   There are, however, many service level, quality, and other variables that have to be taken into account,
   especially when comparing performance among different jurisdictions. For example, the results of a 1996
   survey of 327 Canadian local governments indicated that the key variables affecting residential collection
   costs included the number of households served per truck, tonnes collected per household, time lost to
   labour disputes, private versus public production, and average crew size (McDavid and Eder 1997;
   McDavid 2000).
       Little is known about the relative efficiencies of nonresidential collection arrangements because they
   are difficult to ascertain. They all involve potential monopoly situations, whether they are with municipal
   employees, contracts with private firms, or exclusive franchises, even though competing firms have
   incentives to be as efficient as possible.
       The research on residential waste collection over the years has generally supported the proposition
   that unit costs tend to be lowest where the service is delivered by a private producer in a competitive
   bidding environment. For example, the 1996 survey noted above found that collection by municipal crews
   cost 22.3 percent more on average than collection by private producers. This general proposition was
