                                                                                 ENGINEERING SERVICES      125


further supported in an analysis of the 1996 survey results, with some caveats (McDavid 2001). The
analysis showed that:
    • substantial public-private cost differences occurred only in communities under 10,000 population;
    • overall costs were lower than national average costs where communities divided the collection
        service between public and private producers;
    • contracted-producer costs were substantially lower than public-producer costs in the same com-
        munities with divided collection services; and
    • costs were lower where local governments called for competitive bids than where they simply
        renewed the contracts with the existing companies.
Some studies have suggested that the degree of competition is a more important variable than the public-
private dichotomy. For example, a 1997–98 survey of 132 residential recycling producers in Canada,
including 26 in B.C., found the average recycling cost to be virtually identical for private and public
producers, but with some unusual variations (McDavid and Laliberté 1999; McDavid 2000). In B.C., the
average cost per tonne for private producers was about 65 percent of the average cost for public produc-
ers, which was the highest in the country. In Ontario, where the average overall costs were the lowest in
the country, the private producers were found to be about 61 percent more costly than the public
producers. A possible explanation for the unusual results is that the newness of the service and its linkage
to unstable markets for recycled materials created an environment in which public and private operations
and unit costs were similar to each other (McDavid 2000).
     The 1997–98 survey also found that 75.2 percent of the recycling services were delivered by private
contractors only, 15.7 percent by public employees only, and 9.0 percent by a mixed arrangement of
private and public producers. The average cost per tonne, net of recoveries from the sale of recycled
items, was 158 percent higher than the average cost of residential waste collection found in the 1996
survey. Key variables affecting costs included bin-filling requirements, level of participation, tonnes per
vehicle, type of vehicle, and number of materials accepted for recycling.
     The residential waste collection and recycling surveys cited above were two of three surveys about
solid waste management in Canada conducted in 1996–98. The other, a 1996 survey of 72 landfill
managers, found that most landfills were operated by a mix of local government staff and contracted
personnel (only seven operated with local government employees entirely), and that the average cost of
landfills operated primarily by contracted forces was 67 percent of that of the other landfills (McDavid
and Laliberté 1998; McDavid 2000). The key variables affecting costs included tonnes landfilled per
vehicle, the degree to which dump trucks were used, restrictions on materials accepted for landfilling
(e.g., paper, glass, metal, plastics), and the degree of reliance on compactors.
     Most of the research on solid waste management has been concerned with operational efficiency but
program effectiveness has also been examined. Since 1990, progress towards achieving the B.C.
government’s 10-year goal of reducing the per capita amount of municipal solid waste disposed of in
landfills and incinerators by 50 percent has been tracked through reports provided by regional districts.
By 2000, the 50 percent goal had been exceeded in the Central Kootenay, Cowichan Valley, Powell River
and Sunshine Coast regional districts, while reductions between 40 and 50 percent were reported for the
Central Okanagan, Columbia-Shuswap, Fraser Valley, Kootenay Boundary, Mount Waddington,
Northern Rockies, North Okanagan, and Squamish-Lillooet regional districts.
     In the GVRD, which accounted for about 57 percent of all the waste disposed of in B.C. in 2000, the
per capita amount had been reduced by about 28 percent but the GVRD had started its reduction program
prior to 1990 and its percentage reduction for the decade began from a lower base. In the province as a
whole, the per capita amount had been reduced by almost 30 percent, from 0.879 tonnes per capita in
