126        LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   1990 to 0.618 tonnes in 2000, and the total amount had dropped by 13 percent, from 2,890,516 to
   2,509,112 tonnes.
       While the program fell short of achieving the 50 percent reduction goal that was set in 1990, the
   results still indicated considerable success in diverting recyclable materials from the solid waste stream
   and reducing the amount sent to disposal facilities. Analysis of the data up to 2005 indicated that the per
   capita reduction rate probably reached a plateau of around 30 percent in 1996, and that further reductions
   could only be achieved through new initiatives.
       One initiative aimed at further reducing the amount of solid waste in the disposal stream is a “zero-
   waste” approach, introduced around 1999 and promoted by the Recycling Council of B.C. It emphasizes
   the promotion of waste prevention through the avoidance or reduction of wasteful inefficiencies at all
   stages of a product’s life cycle—resource extraction, processing, manufacturing, distribution, consump-
   tion, recycling, and disposal. By 2006, seven regional districts and seven municipalities representing
   about 63 percent of B.C.’s population had subscribed to the zero-waste approach.23 A number of major
   international business firms also support the approach but, given such factors as the various product
   stewardship programs already in place, it is hard to say how much of an impact the zero-waste initiative
   may have on future solid waste disposal streams in the province.
       Waste reduction and recycling objectives tend to have been most actively pursued in densely popu-
   lated areas, where programs like curbside recycling are more economically feasible, and/or in areas where
   local governments have had difficulties in finding new sanitary landfill sites to replace those reaching
   their capacity. For example, in the Cowichan Valley Regional District, where more than half the
   municipal solid waste stream is recycled, objections from local residents and First Nations forced the
   abandonment of plans for a new landfill to replace several disposal facilities that closed in the late 1990s.
   The CVRD had little choice but to have its residual solid waste shipped to the Greater Vancouver landfill
   in Cache Creek, which it began to do in 1998.

   Observations on solid waste services
  The solid waste management industry is a large one and local governments are primarily involved in
  arranging for residential collection, recycling, and disposal. Disposal is often done through cooperative
  arrangements between municipal and regional district governments. Because of the measurability of the
  activities, residential solid waste collection is an area in which contracts with private companies are used
  extensively, since considerable evidence indicates that the kind of competitive situation associated with
  contracted service delivery gets more efficient results than the monopoly situation associated with
  delivery by municipal staff. Most nonresidential collection is simply left to the private market, with
  individual waste generators and individual collectors working out their own arrangements.
      The nature of the industry has changed considerably since the 1980s, when the main activities were
  simply collection and disposal by incineration or landfilling. Since then, an emphasis on sustainability
  and the five Rs (reduction, reuse, recycling, recovery, residual management), along with strict regulation
  of incinerator and landfilling practices, have become dominant themes in solid waste management
  programs. At the same time, technological advances since the 1980s have enhanced the ability of local
  governments to comply with the stricter regulations and take advantage of opportunities to recover
  compost and energy from their solid waste management activities. These trends can be expected to
  continue in the future, with initiatives such as a zero-waste approach becoming more prominent in local
  government decision making.


   23
           The regional districts were Central Kootenay, Central Okanagan, Cowichan Valley, Greater Vancouver, Kootenay Boundary, Nanaimo, and
      Sunshine Coast. The municipalities were Fruitvale, Grand Forks, Kelowna, Lake Country, Nelson, Rossland, and Trail.
