                                                                                    ENGINEERING SERVICES        127


8.4     Transportation System Management

Nature of the transportation service
A community’s transportation system is critical to its economic life. The more efficiently people and
goods can move from one place to another, the more the community benefits. Where the ability to move
is inhibited by congestion, accidents, or other impediments, transportation costs increase and benefits
diminish. Thus, the engineers and others who manage the transportation system seek to ensure that, as far
as possible, the system provides quick, convenient, comfortable, safe, and cost-effective access to all parts
of the community.
     General transportation system management activities include the planning, design, construction,
acquisition, disposition, operation, and maintenance of a community’s roads, bridges, traffic signs, traffic
signals, road painting, curbs, gutters, public parking facilities, bicycle paths, walkways, streetlighting,
street signs, street furniture (benches, bus shelters, etc.), street trees, and boulevards. Associated activities
include street cleaning, snow removal, and the regulation of traffic, parking, and commercial vehicles.
Because public transit is usually organized and operated separately from other transportation services, it is
discussed separately below.
     Transportation system management generally involves measurable activities in which there is little
interaction between the producer and citizens. However, there can be situations, when a question like the
location, expansion, or closure of a road becomes a controversial issue. Road maintenance demands,
traffic levels, and sign locations on neighbourhood streets can be sensitive issues that require elected
officials to make decisions.
     Traffic congestion, air pollution, and energy consumption associated with transportation have become
a focus of concern for many local governments, especially in larger metropolitan areas. Measures that
may be taken to address these problems include the promotion of public transit, car pooling, teleworking,
the provision of walkways and bicycle paths, the designation of bus priority lanes, high-occupancy
vehicle lanes and/or bicycle lanes on main arteries, the imposition of bridge and/or road tolls, increases in
car parking charges, increases in fuel taxes, and the regulation of vehicle exhaust emissions (e.g., the
AirCare program administered by TransLink).

Transportation system provision
The longstanding powers of B.C. municipalities to possess local public roads was strengthened in a
Community Charter provision granting them full title to the roads. Other roads in unincorporated areas
and provincial highways within municipalities (called arterial highways) are the responsibility of the
transportation ministry. Regional districts are not empowered to possess public roads but a form of
regional road system was introduced in 1998, when TransLink was established and empowered to
designate a Greater Vancouver regional road network, set regional road standards, finance major road
development, and manage transportation systems in cooperation with the municipalities. The municipali-
ties continue to own the roads.
     Local road construction is generally required as part of subdivision processes but unless the subdivi-
sion is within a strata property (condominium), the roads are owned by the municipality or, in
unincorporated territory, by the provincial government. Municipalities are also empowered to regulate
traffic within their jurisdictions, subject to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act, the Highway Act, and
the South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Act.
     General plans for major municipal roads must be included in official community plans and, “to the
extent that these are regional matters,” regional growth strategies must include transportation plans. Plans
