128    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



  for reducing greenhouse gases generated by vehicular traffic and other sources are also required in official
  community plans and regional growth strategies.
       Policymaking discussions and consideration of transportation matters can take up considerable coun-
  cil and committee time. Recommendations may come from the traffic engineering staff or the local
  police. In addition, the frequency with which citizens contact councillors over traffic issues make such
  matters as traffic lights and left-turn lanes common topics for full council deliberation. The construction
  or major rehabilitation of streets also comes before the full council and may come before the electorate if
  the project entails borrowing money and an alternative approval process is required.
       Traffic engineers are aware of the political sensitivity of their activities and have developed a set of
  standards to indicate when improvements, such as stop signs, crosswalks, lights, or multiple traffic lanes
  are needed. The standards (called warrants) are codified in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
  Devices produced by the Transportation Association of Canada. When the warrants call for an improve-
  ment, the municipal engineer will request it from the council. When citizens request improvements that
  do not meet the standards, the engineer may recommend against them. The standards serve a useful
  purpose, especially in larger cities where decisions may be delegated to the traffic engineering staff, but
  elected officials in smaller municipalities may give more weight to citizen complaints than to engineering
  standards.
       Provisions for transportation programs and projects are included in municipal five-year capital ex-
  penditure programs and annual budgets. These include money for the restoration of roads on a regular
  cycle, depending on the type of paving surface and the traffic demands, in accordance with an overall
  maintenance schedule developed by the engineering department.

   Transportation system production
   The planning and design of municipal transportation systems and works is done by engineering specialists
   who may be municipal employees, especially in larger municipalities, or contracted consultants. Small
   municipalities may rely almost exclusively on contracts with private firms for construction and even
   maintenance of roads, traffic control devices, and other items.
       As a municipality increases in size, it is likely that routine engineering and maintenance will be
   looked after by municipal employees, although major projects, such as road reconstruction or a new
   bridge, will still be contracted out. A municipality may also be large enough to construct and maintain its
   own signs, signals, and other elements of the municipal infrastructure.

   Transportation system performance
   As with other engineering services, the range of measures available for monitoring and evaluating the
   performance of a community’s general transportation services is extensive and their use varies considera-
   bly from one jurisdiction to another. The abundant literature on the topic includes documents published
   by such organizations as the Transportation Association of Canada, the U.S. Federal Highway Admini-
   stration, the U.S. Transportation Research Board, Austroads (Australia) and the Organisation for
   Economic Cooperation and Development. A 2001–07 “InfraGuide” program sponsored by the FCM,
   National Research Council, and Infrastructure Canada provided information about best practices for
   sustaining roads, sidewalks, transit, and other parts of the urban infrastructure.
        Commonly measured attributes of transportation system performance and examples of indicators and
   measures associated with these attributes are shown in Exhibit 8–2. The attributes include service level,
   quality (reliability, mobility, accessibility, responsiveness, etc.), safety, system condition, operating cost,
   and environmental impact. Data sources include operational records (traffic counts, pavement ratings, air
   quality measures, etc.), police reports, and user surveys. In the United States, the Texas Transportation
   Institute produces annual data for large- and medium-sized metropolitan areas that includes the number of
