                                                                                                     ENGINEERING SERVICES   129


hours lost to congestion, the excessive costs of congestion, including extra fuel used. There are no similar
annual reports on Canadian urban areas.
    Local road maintenance is a primary municipal government activity. Citizens can be quick to com-
plain about potholes, roughness, and other deficiencies. While most B.C. municipalities maintain their
roads sustainably, in accordance with an overall schedule, road maintenance may sometimes be post-
poned when budgets are tight. The usual rationale is that delaying the work for a year would not make
much difference but, in fact, it increases the risk of incurring long-run fiscal problems. If scheduled road
maintenance is not undertaken when it should be, a municipality can find that increasing numbers of its
roads are deteriorating relatively rapidly, possibly to the point that complete reconstruction rather than
routine maintenance is required. While there now seems to be a greater awareness than there was in the
past of the need to maintain roads and other elements of the urban infrastructure in a sustainable manner,
it may still be difficult to get some elected officials to be concerned if the obvious problems do not occur
during their terms of office.




    EXHIBIT 8–2:           TRANSPORTATION SERVICE PERFORMANCE MEASURES

    Service level, quality, safety, system condition, and cost indicators and measures
    Origin-destination travel times
    Traffic volume-capacity ratios
    Percentage of vehicle-kilometres travelled in congested conditions
    Average number of hours per motorist spent in congested conditions
    Total hours of unplanned major road closures greater than half an hour
    User satisfaction ratings
    Average time between a deficiency report and remediation (pot-hole, sidewalk trip hazard, obstructed or
          missing road sign, etc.)
    Percentage of winter events where the response met or exceeded locally determined road maintenance
          service levels
    Number of accidents (total, per capita, intersection, vehicle-pedestrian, etc.)
    Number of liability claims (pot-holes, sidewalk trips, obstructed or missing road signs, etc.)
    Percentage of paved lane kilometres rated in good to very good condition
    System condition indices (riding comfort, surface distress, structural adequacy, road roughness, pavement
          condition, pavement quality, bridge condition, etc.)
    Operating cost per lane kilometre by type of road (paved, unpaved, etc.)
    Operating cost for winter maintenance per lane kilometre maintained in winter

    Environmental impact indicators and measures
    Tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions                                             Tonnes of other types of air pollutant
    Noise levels                                                                   Traffic congestion levels
    Average vehicle occupancy                                                      Fuel consumption and/or efficiency
    Automobile and bicycle parking activity                                        Cycling and walking travel times
    Modal share (auto driver, auto passenger, transit, bicycling, walking, etc.)
    Public and business travel behaviours, opinions, attitudes, preferences
    Public awareness of sustainable transportation issues and options
    Public transit performance measures                                            Economic efficiency




The main impediments to the effective performance of transportation services in more heavily populated
areas are invariably traffic congestion and related air pollution, especially during peak commuting times.
The air pollution problem can be mitigated through regulatory interventions, such as the AirCare program
administered by TransLink in the Lower Mainland, and it will be substantially reduced in the longer term
