130    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   as older cars are replaced with newer ones and as “clean” fuel, hybrid power, and other “green” technolo-
   gies are used more extensively. Plans for reducing greenhouse gases are also required in official
   community plans and regional growth strategies. At the same time, the problem of dealing with traffic
   congestion, with its adverse effects on economic efficiency and competitiveness, is a major challenge.


   8.5     Public Transit

   Nature of the public transit service
   The provision of commercial transportation services in urban areas has a long history. Before the
   development of motorized vehicles, people travelled in horse-drawn cabs and streetcars on rails.
   Communal car or bus transport began shortly after the introduction of the automobile. Automobile owners
   simply put signs in their windows and picked up riders along transit routes, charging a small fare to help
   pay for their automobiles. Gradually, the owners and operators of the streetcar systems and early bus
   services were able to have such activities made illegal and local transit came to be dominated by single
   transit systems supplemented only by heavily regulated taxicabs. Over time, most streetcars were phased
   out and largely replaced by motor buses, although some cities may also have electric trolley bus, light rail,
   medium rail, heavy rail and/or local ferry services, such as the trolley bus, SkyTrain, West Coast Express,
   and SeaBus systems serving Greater Vancouver.
        Today, public transit has come to be viewed as a natural monopoly like a public utility in which a
   single company can best provide transportation for people who lack access to an automobile or for whom
   public transport is a choice. Public transit is also viewed as a way for people to reduce traffic congestion,
   air pollution, and parking demands. However, because most people have automobiles and because
   automobiles are quick and convenient, it is difficult for public transit systems to attract sufficient riders at
   high enough fares to cover their costs. Most North American cities and all B.C. municipalities, except
   parts of Vancouver and Victoria, have relatively low population densities, so that origins and destinations
   for travel are spread throughout large areas. This makes it difficult to fill buses on most routes except for
   the two or three hours a day in which work and school trips are concentrated. If sufficient buses are
   provided for peak hours, they will sit idle or be underutilized the rest of the day.
        The problem of service to low-density areas becomes aggravated as transit systems spread further and
   further into the suburbs. In these low-density areas buses do not run very often. The further apart the
   headways are, the less convenient the service is and the fewer riders it attracts. Combining routes and
   using transfers leads to the same dilemma because the more time and inconvenience incurred in transfer-
   ring, the more ridership declines. Transit managers who attempt to improve service often find that the
   costs exceed the revenues generated by the improvement.
        Because the availability of transit is important for some people, such as the elderly, people without
   automobiles, and families with two employed members, and because the public subsidies involved are
   large, transit is a politically sensitive issue. At the same time, the productivity of a transit system can be
   easily measured, even though it is difficult to quantify just what value citizens place on its availability and
   use.

   Public transit provision
   Local transit systems in B.C. date back more than 100 years. The first was established in Victoria in 1890
   and another began operating in Nelson in 1899. BC Hydro operated the systems in Vancouver and
   Victoria for many years but when the provincial government began to subsidize them in 1972, many
   citizens felt that providing subsidies to some areas but not others was unfair. Consequently, the entire
   public transit policy framework was reorganized in 1978 to make it a joint local-provincial responsibility,
