                                                                                 ENGINEERING SERVICES       131


with local governments providing the initiative for new or expanded services and sharing in the burden of
subsidizing them. To provide overall coordination and policymaking, the provincial government
established the Urban Transit Authority, which later became BC Transit.
    Today, public transit services in the province are provided through two central coordinating agencies.
In Greater Vancouver, they are provided by TransLink. In the rest of the province they are provided by
BC Transit in cooperation with over 50 local governments. Except in Vancouver and Victoria, local
governance of transit systems is provided under BC Transit’s municipal systems program, which involves
partnerships between BC Transit, local governments and transit operators. The local government partner
may be a municipality or a regional district and will usually have a committee responsible for transit. The
service area may be relatively small or may cover an entire regional district, as in Nanaimo. In Greater
Victoria, the local governing agency is the Victoria Regional Transit Commission, whose seven directors
are appointed by the provincial government from among the locally elected civic officials in the region.
    BC Transit is a Crown corporation governed by a seven-member board of directors appointed by the
provincial government in accordance with the British Columbia Transit Act. Two directors must be from
the Victoria Regional Transit Commission and two others must be mayors or regional district board chairs
from the other B.C. communities served by the agency. The board’s mandate includes approving the
annual capital and operating budgets for each community’s transit system, as well as operator selection
and the designation of transit service areas in most localities. Each local government partner is responsi-
ble for enacting appropriate bylaws, funding its share of transit costs, setting system objectives, and
approving plans, routes, schedules, and fares.
    BC Transit provides planning, marketing, vehicle fleet, and funding support for three basic types of
local transit systems.
    • Conventional transit uses mid-sized, large, articulated, or double-deck buses, most fully accessi-
         ble with low floors, to serve urban areas with fixed routes and schedules.
    • Custom transit uses minibuses, vans, and contracted taxicabs to deliver dial-a-ride door-to-door
         (HandyDART) service for disabled people who cannot use conventional transit.
    • Paratransit uses minibuses, vans, and contracted taxicabs to provide flexible routing and sched-
         ules for passengers in suburban, small town, and rural areas.
In 2007–08, there were 81 of these systems outside of Greater Vancouver, including 25 conventional, 15
custom and 41 paratransit systems. Within this framework, there were also programs aimed at enhancing
services for particular groups, such as reduced fares for seniors, semester passes for university and college
students (partly funded from tuition fees), and non-emergency medical transportation services for
residents of small towns and rural areas (partly funded by a regional health authority). Similar programs
were offered by TransLink in Greater Vancouver.
    To initiate transit service in its jurisdiction, a local government must pass a resolution asking BC
Transit to conduct a feasibility study, for which the local government pays half the cost. The study is
conducted by BC Transit staff in cooperation with the local government and takes into account local
objectives, land use patterns, travel demand patterns, transportation networks, and public input. Upon
approval of a concept plan and a subsequent implementation plan, the two parties sign a five-year transit
service agreement that describes their responsibilities and the area to be served. Unless the system is to be
directly operated by the local government, a transit operator is then selected and the three parties sign
master and annual operating agreements that describe their responsibilities, the service to be delivered,
budget, cost sharing, payment schedule, tariff, and operational requirements.
    The provisions for cost sharing are prescribed in the Act and regulations. BC Transit’s share is pro-
vided by the provincial government while the local government’s share comes from property taxes, fares,
advertising, miscellaneous sources and, in Victoria, a motor fuel tax. In 2007–08, BC Transit funded
