132    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   26.68 percent of conventional service costs in the Victoria regional transit service area and 46.69 percent
   in other areas. For custom and paratransit services, BC Transit funded 63.0 percent of the cost in Victoria
   and 66.69 percent in other areas.
        The share of total expenditures funded by property taxes varies substantially from system to system,
   as does the share funded by fares and other revenues. A flexible funding option permits a local govern-
   ment to increase its share of the funding if it wishes to enhance the service in its area. Additional funding
   for transit improvements was made available to all transit providers under a 2006 federal-provincial gas
   tax program and a 2007 provincial program, both administered by the Union of British Columbia
   Municipalities, and the 2008 provincial transit plan.
        In 2007–08, BC Transit had operating expenditures of about $169.3 million, including interest on
   long-term debt and amortization of capital expenditures. About 35 percent of this was financed by
   operating revenue, 27.6 percent by local taxes and 37.3 percent by provincial grants. Services in Greater
   Victoria accounted for approximately 41 percent of this budget. In the same year, TransLink spent some
   $593 million on its transit operations, of which about 55 percent was financed by transit fares and
   advertising.

   Public transit production
   With only a few exceptions, the arrangements for delivering the transit services provided by BC Transit
   and its local government partners involve contracts with private operators. In 2007–08, the exceptions
   included:
       • Conventional and custom systems operated directly by BC Transit in Greater Victoria
       • Conventional and custom systems operated by the Regional District of Nanaimo
       • Conventional and paratransit systems operated by the Sunshine Coast Regional District
       • Conventional systems operated by the municipalities of Nelson and Powell River
   In other areas, conventional service is normally delivered by a commercial firm while the custom or
   paratransit service may be delivered by either a commercial firm or a nonprofit organization, such as the
   Summerland Transit Society. In 2007–08, the contracted operators included 24 commercial firms and 14
   nonprofit organizations.
        Contracted operators are selected through a competitive process on a five-year cycle, except in a few
   cases where the operator is a nonprofit society with a small budget. The contracts are signed annually and
   specify in detail the responsibilities and performance expected of the operator, the local government and
   BC Transit. The operator is generally responsible for managing, operating, maintaining, and providing
   statistics on various aspects of the service. The local government is responsible for fare setting, bus stops,
   security, local financial management, and marketing in cooperation with BC Transit.
        In 2007–08, BC Transit reported that it had a fleet of 850 buses, minibuses, and vans. Its systems
   served more than 1.4 million B.C. residents and carried 44.7 million passengers, including 22.4 million in
   Victoria’s conventional system, 20.4 million in other conventional systems, and 1.9 million in custom and
   paratransit systems. The agency’s staff included over 600 employees, of whom more than 400 were
   Victoria bus drivers.
        Public transit services in Greater Vancouver are delivered by TransLink, which includes:
        • TransLink subsidiaries operating the bus, SeaBus, SkyTrain, and West Coast Express systems
        • West Vancouver’s bus system
        • Private organizations that operate community shuttle and custom systems
   In 2007, TransLink reported that its fleet of approximately 2,025 vehicles included 1,448 buses, 210
   SkyTrain cars, 328 custom vehicles, 37 West Coast Express train coaches, and 2 SeaBus craft. The
   systems carried some 172 million revenue passengers. Coast Mountain Bus Company, TransLink’s
