                                                                                  ENGINEERING SERVICES       133


largest operating subsidiary, employed over 5,200 people, including 3,350 transit drivers, 830 mainte-
nance employees, and 75 SeaBus staff.

Public transit performance
The measurement of public transit system performance in British Columbia is based on cost, revenue,
ridership, and other data that are commonly used throughout North America. Agencies such as the
Canadian Urban Transit Association (CUTA), American Public Transportation Association, U.S. Federal
Transit Administration, and U.S. Transportation Research Board (TRB) provide information that local
transit agencies can use in assessing their performance.
     Transit system performance in B.C. is continuously measured. BC Transit regularly reports how its
performance compares to other Canadian systems using the CUTA benchmark data shown in Exhibit 8–3,
which Statistics Canada also uses for its reports. BC Transit has reported that its performance compares
favourably to the CUTA benchmarks, with a few exceptions. In Victoria, the operating cost per hour for
conventional transit was found to have been slightly above average in 2003, which the agency attributed
to relatively high wage, benefits, and work rule costs. In other parts of B.C., the six most heavily used
conventional transit systems had a slightly lower-than-average operating cost recovery, which was
attributed to lower average fares set by the local government partners. The six systems also had a slightly
higher average operating cost per hour but the agency observed that BC Transit’s costs were all inclusive,
whereas many of the CUTA peer systems were line departments of municipalities whose corporate
service costs were not fully allocated to their transit operations.
     Based on guidelines adopted in 2004, TransLink measures the comprehensiveness, frequency, con-
venience, comfort, reliability, and efficiency of the various transit service modes for which it is
responsible, using the other transit performance measures and indicators shown in Exhibit 8–3. TransLink
also makes extensive use of quarterly customer-satisfaction surveys conducted by evaluation specialists.
The detailed surveys measure customer perceptions of service quality and value for money, including
such variables as adequacy of transit information, wait time for connections between modes, convenience
of hours of operation, adequacy of bus shelters, ease of using the telephone information service, and ease
of navigating the website. The results are analyzed with a TRB impact score methodology and are used to
identify service improvement priorities.

Observations on public transit services
Transit services that people can use instead of private vehicles are generally considered to play an
important role in providing the long-term sustainability of urban transportation systems, especially in
highly populated areas. The more people who can be persuaded to travel by transit, the more urban traffic
congestion may be reduced.
    When TransLink was established in 1998–99, it took over responsibility for services in Greater Van-
couver that had accounted for about 86 percent of BC Transit’s budget. The change enabled BC Transit to
focus more strongly on services in Victoria and the communities in its municipal systems program. In
these communities, the institutional arrangements appear to provide a good framework for transit
policymaking. Since public transit more than just a local responsibility and is supported by provincial
funding, it is appropriate that the provincial government has a voice in transit policy decisions, and this is
accomplished through joint decision making between BC Transit and the local governments that want
transit services. At the same time, the desire of local politicians to expand public transit is conditioned by
the need to provide a share of the subsidies, and having the provincial share specified in advance is better
for decision making than having it negotiated each year. The initiative for new or expanded services, or
the modification of existing services, appropriately comes from the local government, which best
understands local needs.
