                                                                                  ENGINEERING SERVICES       135


8.6     Emerging Engineering Service Activities
Because of their nature, local government engineering services have become a main focus of “green”
policies and initiatives aimed at fostering more sustainable community development. One initiative has
involved investigations by a number of communities into the feasibility of establishing district energy
services, like those that are common in Europe, and the actual implementation of such services in the
cities of North Vancouver and Revelstoke. A second initiative has involved the exploitation of possibili-
ties for generating energy from water and waste management service activities. Finally, a unique
illustration of how these and other initiatives may be integrated in a contemporary development is
provided in the Dockside Green project in Victoria, a private-sector undertaking but one for which the
City of Victoria can claim much credit.

District energy services
A district energy service involves the distribution of thermal energy from a central heating plant to a
number of users in the vicinity of the plant. Where the users are building occupants, the district service
replaces the individual heating plants that would otherwise be installed in each building. The system
typically involves a simple loop in which hot water or steam is delivered to the buildings and cold water
is returned to the central plant for reheating and recirculation. The various possible methods of heating the
water include burning fossil fuels, biofuels, or waste products, capturing solar or geothermal energy, or
reusing waste heat from other processes.
     A district energy system is similar to a municipal water supply system. Both deliver water through
pipes, possess economies of scale in service delivery, and have the characteristics of a natural public
utility monopoly. As it grows, a district energy utility’s purchasing power increases, enhancing its ability
to buy fuels at lower rates than individual building owners could obtain. Like a water utility, a district
energy utility could conceivably serve a whole city. For example, parallel cold water and hot water
municipal systems are found all over Iceland, where geothermally heated water is supplied to almost 90
percent of the buildings for space heating and domestic purposes.
     District energy systems are commonly found in European cities and in complexes like university
campuses, but they are less common in North American cities. In B.C., they include a provincially
regulated investor-owned utility in Vancouver, which was established in 1967 and supplies steam heat to
more than 170 downtown buildings, and the publicly owned utilities in the cities of North Vancouver and
Revelstoke. New systems are underway for Vancouver’s Southeast False Creek development, site of the
2010 Olympic Village, and for the Dockside Green project in Victoria. Burnaby, Coquitlam, Prince
George, and Quesnel have studied the feasibility of establishing district energy systems in their communi-
ties.

Energy recovery from water and waste service activities
Technological advances since the 1980s have enhanced the feasibility of recovering thermal and other
forms of energy from water and waste management activities. Local governments wishing to exploit
energy recovery and reuse opportunities usually enter into contractual arrangements with private firms
that bring the needed technical and operational expertise to the process.
     The forms of energy recovered from water and wastewater management activities include electricity,
chemical energy (biogas), and thermal energy (hot water, steam, waste heat). Biogas is usually burned to
generate electrical and/or thermal energy but it can also be used to fuel vehicles, and for cooking, lighting,
and absorptive refrigeration. Where electricity is produced it may be sold to BC Hydro, which distributes
power to most of the province, or to FortisBC, an investor-owned utility that serves south central B.C.
Examples of water and wastewater energy recovery activities among B.C. local governments include:
