136    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       •   The production of “micro-hydro” electricity by West Vancouver from the kinetic energy in water
           flowing downhill from Eagle Lake, the municipality’s source of potable water
       •   The recovery of heat for Okanagan University College (OUC) buildings from high-quality re-
           claimed wastewater, which is produced at Kelowna’s sewage treatment plant and circulated to the
           nearby OUC boiler plant before it is eventually discharged into Lake Okanagan
       •   The use of biogas recovered from the anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge to cogenerate heat
           and electricity for the operation of several GVRD sewage treatment plants
       •   The use of steam produced by burning municipal solid waste at the GVRD’s state-of-the-art
           “waste-to-energy” incinerator in Burnaby to generate electricity and directly heat the dryers in a
           nearby recycled paper plant
       •   The use of steam and hot water produced by burning sawmill wood waste to heat the mill’s dry
           kilns and the buildings served by the Revelstoke district heating system discussed above
       •   The use of biogas collected at the GVRD’s Coquitlam landfill, which closed in 1983, to fuel the
           boilers and a rotary drum dryer in a nearby newsprint recycling plant
       •   The use of biogas collected at the CRD’s Hartland landfill, Kelowna’s Glenmore landfill, and
           Vancouver’s Delta landfill to produce electricity and, in Delta, hot water for greenhouses
  These are examples of the many possibilities for using recovered water and waste energy.


   8.7     Observations on Engineering Services
   The main engineering services provided by B.C. local governments include the water supply, waste
   management, and transportation services examined in this chapter. They usually account for most of the
   operating expenditures on engineering services incurred by local governments, although other public
   works, such as diking systems, may account for a large proportion of the assets in some cases. With only
   a few exceptions, provincial or private agencies provide other engineering-based services, such as
   electricity, gas, and telecommunications. Engineering services have also become a focus for “green”
   policies.
        Engineering services tend to be capital intensive, measurable, and impersonally provided. The plan-
   ning, design, and construction of major facilities are almost always contracted out to private firms, and
   day-to-day operations, such as solid waste collection and disposal, are often contracted out as well.
   Studies of performance indicate that local governments can provide many engineering services more
   efficiently in the competitive environments associated with contracts than through the monopolistic
   environments of local government organizations. Local government managers who are aware of the
   various service delivery alternatives are in a good position to select the best production arrangements for
   different kinds of service activities.
