                                                                                      HUMAN SERVICES          137




 Chapter Nine
Human Services


H
         uman service functions include education, recreation and cultural services, public health and
         health services, social welfare, and housing. Many of these services, especially in the areas of
         social welfare, health, and housing are provided by the provincial and federal governments. The
human services in which B.C. local governments play an important role include education, parks and
recreation, libraries, museums, public health, and social housing.
    Education is the single most expensive local government function. For general-purpose local govern-
ments, parks and recreation has become one of the three most expensive functions, along with policing
and roads. Libraries and museums cost much less. The public health function, which has been taken over
by regional health authorities, has historically absorbed only a small proportion of local government
budgets but has been important in the Lower Mainland and Capital regions. Housing affordability for
low-income people is an important concern for many local governments.


9.1     Education
Education is a major provincial and local government activity in British Columbia. The range of programs
is extensive and includes:
     • local, district, francophone, and independent schools at the elementary and secondary levels;
     • home schooling;
     • special education for children with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities, as well as students
        who are gifted, homebound, or hospitalized;
     • aboriginal education;
     • English as a second language;
     • distance education; and
     • post-secondary education programs.
This section will focus on local government involvement in elementary and secondary education, as local
school districts serve the largest number of students. One must recognize, that local school districts are
only one group among the many highly interdependent institutions providing educational services in the
province.

Nature of the service
Education services assist people to learn, and may range from elementary cognitive skills such as reading,
writing, and arithmetic, to advanced academic skills, or specialized training for employment. The services
may also help with social skills and with non-academic recreational or leisure-time activities, such as
sports or music. A large share of the benefits of education, especially in higher grades, accrues to the
students. External benefits for society include literacy and social understanding. These external benefits
are one of the justifications for public schools and public financing of education in general. A more
important rationale for public involvement, is the argument that there should be minimal barriers to
education for those who cannot afford to purchase services on their own. Public education also plays an
important role in socialization of children, which is beneficial to society.
