138     LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       Most education involves face-to-face interaction between students and teachers. Education is labour
   intensive and the salaries of employees constitute most of the cost. Students supplement face-to-face
   learning with reading, problem solving, interacting with media, including films and computers, and work
   experience. Still, for most educational activities, teachers are responsible for organizing work and
   monitoring progress.

   Provision framework
   Elementary and secondary (K–12) education policymaking is divided among several institutions in
   British Columbia, including the education ministry and school districts. The education ministry is
   responsible for the legislation under which 59 local school districts and a Francophone Education
   Authority are constituted and governed. It establishes elementary and secondary curriculum standards and
   sets the amount of funding for local school boards. The provincial requirement of standardized examina-
   tions also encourages the standardization of curricula throughout the province. Locally elected school
   board members and local administrators have decision-making authority over teachers, the breadth of the
   curriculum, special programs, extracurricular activities, and allocating the budget provided by the
   education ministry.24
        Each school has a governance structure that includes a School Planning Council and a Parent Advi-
   sory Council. School Planning Councils are advisory bodies that develop, monitor, and review school
   plans for student achievement in consultation with the school community. A Parent Advisory Council,
   through its elected officers, may advise the school board, the principal, and staff of the school respecting
   any matter relating to the school other than matters assigned to the School Planning Council.
        The education ministry also supervises independent schools, which, if they meet certain conditions,
   qualify for provincial financial aid equal to a maximum of 50 percent of the cost per student of the local
   public school district. This subsidy for independent schools can be viewed as a voucher system. Other
   services funded by the ministry include home schooling and distance education, special education
   services for students with special needs in the school system, treatment centres, the BC Provincial School
   for the Deaf, English-as-a-second-language programs, and international student exchange programs. The
   education ministry also funds programs for school meals, inner-city schools, community schools, and
   summer activities.

   Production arrangements
  Local governments are most involved in elementary and secondary education. With a few exceptions
  (primarily students served by independent schools) the service is delivered through schools run by the
  local school districts. School districts in B.C. served approximately 590,000 pupils in 2006–07. This is a
  decrease of approximately 56,000 students from the 1997–98 school year. Due to this decline in
  enrollment and fiscal pressures, 175 schools in BC were closed between 2001 and 2007. Teaching
  processes are fairly standardized throughout the province, although in rural areas there may still be
  several grades of students in a single classroom.
      While school districts operate their own schools, it is common to contract out some support activities,
  such as school busing, building construction, and maintenance. Some school districts have joint purchas-
  ing agreements with municipal governments, which allow them to obtain supplies at lower costs.

   Performance measurement
   Education is diverse and difficult to measure. Three factors cause this difficulty. First, only some skills
   are measurable and there are no generally recognized units of measurement for other valuable benefits,

   24
       While a school board can levy property taxes a year at a time, the levy requires a referendum. No school districts have requested this
  approach as of 2008.
