                                                                                                                  HUMAN SERVICES                 139


such as socialization or acculturation. Second, one must be careful to disentangle institutional learning
from intellectual capacity, aptitude, and the influences of the home or societal environment. Third,
learning involves considerable work by the student who may or may not have the time or the motivation
to perform. The difficulty to measure the outputs or impacts of all kinds of learning, and to disentangle
outside influences, means that it is a relatively difficult activity to manage.
     There is great interest in school performance, particularly demonstrated by the interest in the Fraser
Institute’s annual report card on BC schools.25 There has also been extensive focus on the use of
standardized testing to measure the performance of students. These tests have been critiqued, with the
accusation of pushing curriculum and learning toward success on the test, rather than broader educational
achievement. As well, it is argued that other factors affect test outcomes, particularly the socio-economic
level of the students and the community.
     School districts are required to collect data and monitor the performance of their schools, in accor-
dance with the achievement agreements they sign with the provincial government as part of the funding
process. These agreements are the boards of education’s public commitment to improving student
achievement. Each contract is created based on student performance information at the classroom, school,
district, and provincial level and reflects the unique characteristics, priorities, and needs of each district.
     The education ministry collects a large amount of data on education, including data related to students
(total, grade, select student group), class size, educator (number, type, salary), funding, foundational skills
assessment results, provincial exam final mark results, grade-to-grade transition, grade 12 graduation, six-
year completion rate, scholarships and awards, transition to B.C. post-secondary, and satisfaction survey
results.
     The environmental measures the education ministry uses to assess the performance of schools in-
clude:
     • district population (employment, family structure, primary language at home);
     • early development indicators; and
     • school readiness (early development instrument)—percentage of children who enter kindergarten
          ready to learn.
Some of the education ministry performance measures are:
   • completion rate;
   • national and international assessments (Pan-Canadian assessment program, program for interna-
       tional student assessment);
   • participation in industry-training programs;
   • transition rate to post-secondary education;
   • percentage of public school students and parents satisfied with educational choices available to
       them;
   • reading and numeracy skills (foundation skills assessment grades 4 and 7)—percentage of stu-
       dents who meet or exceed standards; and
   • percentage of students who pass one of the following language arts 12 courses (English 12 or
       Communications 12).

Observations
In the seven years from 1976 to 1983, school district expenditures per student rose from $1,738 to $3,935,
a rate of increase that was about 30 percent greater than the inflation rate. The magnitude of the increase
led to rigid provincial fiscal control from 1983 to 1985, when costs were reduced to $2,190 per pupil. By

25
     The Fraser Institute reports are annual. Another approach used by the C.D. Howe Institute gives weight to socio-economic factors (Johnson
2008).
