140    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   1988–89, however, costs had risen to $4,846 per pupil and, five years later, had increased to $6,339, a rate
   that exceeded the inflation rate by about 10 percent over the five-year period. In 2007–08 funding will be
   an estimated $7,932 per student, an increase of $336 from 2006–07.
        Most evidence on the production of public services indicates that such services are best produced by
   relatively small or decentralized organizations. Cost increases in B.C., however, have resulted in greater
   and greater central control, to the point where the provincial government sets school district budgets and
   has engaged directly in collective bargaining with the teachers’ union. These trends, which are quite the
   opposite of those for municipalities and regional districts, make school districts more like decentralized
   part of the provincial government than part of the local government system even though the education
   ministry still considers them to have considerable autonomy.


   9.2     Parks and Recreation
   Governments have a long tradition of providing local parks and playgrounds in settled areas. In the 1970s,
   local governments in B.C. started to become active in providing a variety of other recreation facilities and
   programs, often on the premise that they contribute to the wellbeing of a community in a manner
   comparable to educational facilities and programs. Parks and recreation services have now become one of
   the largest expenditures for many municipalities and regional districts, and are often heavily subsidized
   by property tax revenues.

   Nature of the services
   Local parks and playgrounds are generally open to all citizens without restrictions and hence have the
   characteristics of a public good. Most recreation programs, often partially financed through user fees,
   provide an individual benefit, but still play an important role in the overall physical and social health of a
   community. In general, participation in the programs can be easily monitored, the users are clearly
   identifiable and the programs readily lend themselves to being financed through user charges. There is
   currently increased attention to health and physical fitness as a preventable health care strategy, and thus
   more provincial funding to support initiatives in this area.

   Provision framework
   Most municipalities, all regional districts, and 18 improvement districts provide parks, recreation
   facilities, or recreation programs. The 1973 creation of a provincial Community Recreational Facilities
   Fund spurred local activity in recreation infrastructure. Prior to that, provincial support was limited.
   Between 1973 and 1975 the availability of provincial funding for one-third of the cost of recreational
   facilities resulted in 188 communities spending over $36 million on 604 new projects, including curling
   rinks, community centres, tennis courts, camps, ice arenas, swimming pools, playing fields, and golf
   courses. More recently, grant programs have been introduced that are not specifically designed to fund
   parks and recreation, but fund related projects. The Spirit Square Program has provided grants for parks in
   some communities and LocalMotion has provided funding for the development of trails in some
   communities.
        Recreation facilities in municipalities are typically managed by a recreation commission that is usu-
   ally composed of several councillors and citizen appointees. Members of local school boards may also be
   appointed to the commission. In the City of Vancouver, members of the Board of Parks and Recreation
   are elected. In addition to commissions established by municipalities, there are more than 400 recreation
   commissions organized either by regional districts or nonprofit societies in unincorporated areas.
        Since 1998, municipalities and regional districts have had broad authority to establish commissions to
   operate services and manage property and to delegate much decision making to these commissions. In
   practice, the autonomy of recreation commissions varies. Some make all policy decisions and only their
