                                                                                       HUMAN SERVICES         141


budget is dealt with by council or the regional board. Others function more like committees of council or
of a regional board, with major policy decisions going before the entire governing body.

Production arrangements
A majority of parks and recreation facilities are planned, designed, and built by private firms under
contract to local governments. Once constructed, the facilities may be run by local government employ-
ees, a local nonprofit society, or a private organization under a contract or franchise agreement. As well, a
private partner may own the facility and lease portions of it to the municipality, for instance, ice arena
rentals. Public-private partnerships are increasingly common, especially for a large-scale facility such as
an arena.
     There are two key sources of funding for parks. The first is the Local Government Act requirement
that owners of land that is being subdivided set aside five percent of the land for parks or pay the
municipality or regional district an amount that equals the market value of that land. The other funding
option is the use of development cost charges specified under legislation. Land set aside for parks
(discussed in Chapter 10) and service charges are common but they do not cover costs in most cases. In
addition, most centres have a policy that specific assistance to individuals, such as golf or tennis
instruction, is provided on a fee-for-service basis. Volunteer workers also deliver services for such
activities as baseball, soccer, curling, hockey, and craft workshops. Some local governments use voucher
systems to subsidize access to recreational services for lower-income people who cannot afford to pay full
user fees.

Performance evaluation
Parks and recreational activities can play an important role in the state of health of individuals in a
community and the amount of exercise citizens participate in. These outcomes can be assessed through a
variety of performance measures related to recreation facilities, participation in recreation programs,
citizen satisfaction, and amount of physical activity. It is important that performance measures account for
the size and demographics of the population the parks and recreation facilities serve. There are currently
no uniform national or provincial performance measures for parks and recreation, but this is a priority for
the BC Recreation & Parks Association.
     Examples of performance measure for parks and recreation include:
     • Total kilometres of trails per 1,000 persons
     • Square metres of municipal indoor recreation facilities per 1,000 persons
     • Square metres of municipally owned outdoor recreation facility space per 1,000 persons
     • Number of park maintenance employees per square kilometre of developed land
     • Number of recreation courses offered
     • Total participant hours for recreation programs per 1,000 persons
     • Operating costs for parks per person
     • Operating costs for recreation programs per person
     • Operating costs for recreation facilities per person
     • Operating costs for recreation programs and recreation facilities per person
While these measures are for active parks, some municipalities and regional districts also maintain natural
habitats and sanctuaries where different kinds of performance measures would be appropriate.

Observations
The availability of provincial grants, especially in 1973–75, led to a major expansion of the recreation
facilities provided by local governments in British Columbia. Subsequent grants have been relatively
smaller. The limited use of user charges to fully finance ongoing programs, has led to large local
