142     LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   government expenditures from property tax revenues on this function. Recreation is politically sensitive,
   not necessarily because of widespread citizen participation but because the users are well organized and
   vocal. The use of facilities by “free-riders” who do not live in the municipality can be an issue when user
   charges do not cover the costs of programs. Tools to overcome the free-rides issue include implementing
   different user charges for residents and nonresidents, or having regional districts provide recreational
   services, in which case all residents of the regional district contributes through tax revenue.


   9.3       Libraries
   In 2006 there were 240 public library facilities and 76 locally appointed library boards in B.C. These
   library boards were responsible for more than $170 million in annual spending.

   Nature of the service
  Libraries lend a wide variety of materials and provide a range of programs and services to the public.
  Among the many materials and resources on loan are books, magazines, CDs, video and audio recordings,
  and eBooks. Services include public computers with Internet access, reference services, interlibrary loan,
  licensed database access, workshops and user guides on topics such as computers, career development,
  English as a second language, small business development, etc. Library programming includes author
  readings, storytimes, summer reading programs, book clubs, slide shows, and events and programs
  designed for various age groups. Libraries are also a place for community meetings and relaxation. While
  libraries are common throughout the province and are a natural monopoly in some respects, their services
  do not possess characteristics that make governmental provision funded by taxation obviously superior to
  nonprofit or alternative arrangements for similar services.
       Historically, many public libraries were begun by nonprofit societies and financed from contributions
  by community members. Today, local governments provide approximately 83 percent of public library
  revenue. The provincial government contributes about another 10 percent, and fundraising and other
  grants and contributions make up the rest.

   Provision framework
  Libraries in B.C. are provided by municipalities, regional library districts, regional districts, and nonprofit
  associations. They are each governed by an appointed library board, which is administratively separate
  from other aspects of local government. Under the Library Act, there are five types of libraries and
  associated boards, including:
      • a library created by an incorporated public library association whose board consists of five to nine
          members elected by the association membership, plus a council or board representative from each
          municipality or regional district that provides the library with a grant;
      • a municipal library whose board is appointed by the council, including one councillor and four to
          twelve municipal residents or electors who are neither councillors nor employees of the munici-
          pality or library board;
      • a regional library district, of which there are three in the province, as described in Chapter 5;
      • an integrated public library system operated by a regional district, such as in the Cariboo and
          Thompson-Nicola regional districts;26 and
      • a library federation established by two or more library boards and governed by a federated library
          board (there are now five library federations across the province that facilitate the collaboration of


   26
       The authority of regional districts to operate new integrated library systems was abrogated in 1994 but existing systems were permitted to
  continue operating.
