                                                                                        HUMAN SERVICES           143


        public libraries in specific regions on shared issues for their mutual benefit, including collections,
        programming, training, etc.).
The Library Act is administered by the education ministry’s Public Library Services Branch. The branch
ensures compliance with the Act, provides operating and other grants to public libraries, supports public
libraries through consultation, training, and technical services, provides libraries with guidance in
identifying and securing revenue from new sources, promotes information sharing among B.C.’s libraries,
provides technical and financial support for a provincial interlibrary loan system, produces audio books
for people with visual or neurological impairments, and provides access to library materials for individu-
als with special needs. The minister may also appoint one or more bodies to provide advice on library
services, but individual library policies are made by each of the many different library boards in the
province.
     The Library Act outlines the basic public library services that must be provided free of charge. These
services include admission to the public library building and use of library material on the library
premises. Residents of the area must have a free access to borrow library materials and use references and
information services. Libraries may charge fees for library fines and services not covered by the
legislation.

Production arrangements
Library boards are responsible for their own administration. Library policymaking is separated from
regular political decision making through the use of appointed boards, and library issues are infrequently
politically visible, though disputes arise over the budget, new buildings, or controversial public issues,
such as library access or freedom of expression.
    It is fairly common, especially in rural areas, for libraries to use volunteers for service delivery. The
use of volunteers may depend on the level of unionization, though some collective agreements include a
role for volunteers.

Performance evaluation
The education ministry’s Public Library Services Branch currently collects statistics annually as an
accountability measure for the funding it provides. The branch collects information on revenue, expendi-
ture, size of collection, number of cardholders, programs, number of questions answered, circulation (all
items, children’s books), population of service area, and annual in-person visits. These statistics are
publicly available through the branch’s website and are also in the process of being refined to allow for
comparison between libraries across the province.
    The Public Library Services Branch plans to develop additional performance measures that will better
measure how libraries make an impact, both socially and economically, on the local communities they
serve. These performance measures will ideally include more qualitative data about user satisfaction with
a wide range library programs and services. These measures would be developed in consultation with
local public libraries.

Observations
Libraries are an activity undertaken by local governments but there is a lot of community and volunteer
participation as well as governance by separate library boards.


9.4     Museums
In 2008 there were 381 museums, art galleries, historic sites, archives, and natural history or botanical
sites listed on the BC Museum Association website. Most were owned and operated by local nonprofit
