144    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   societies. Some museums are operated by private firms, some are owned and operated by local govern-
   ments, and a few are operated by local government employees for a nonprofit society.

   Nature of the service
   Most of the smaller museums in British Columbia focus on the history of their local area. Individuals who
   visit museums are easily identified. Some museums have user charges and some also perform an
   important educational function and help create a feeling of community for their residents. Local govern-
   ments play an increasing role in helping to ensure these institutions locally promote civic engagement,
   social discourse, and social responsibility. There is also growing support for the involvement of museums
   and other cultural institutions to play an increased role in local communities and re-engage residents.
   Widespread volunteer and nonprofit involvement demonstrates the importance of museums regarded by
   many local residents.

   Provision framework
   Museums provided by municipalities are usually run by a committee of council or by the boards of
   historical societies to which one or two councillors are appointed. The society board then functions like a
   police commission or a library board, directly overseeing museum operation. If the museum is a local
   government service, budgets must be approved by the local government. The provincial ministry
   responsible for cultural services provides grants for specific museum activities but the activities for which
   grant applications are made are determined by each local museum. The BC Museums Association
   provides a number of programs to the museum and cultural community, including some grant programs,
   youth work assistance, and technology support. It also acts as a lobbying agency.

   Production arrangements
   Municipal museums are usually run by local government employees, often with volunteer assistance from
   historical societies. Even some managed by nonprofit societies, such as the museums in Burnaby,
   Kamloops, and New Westminster, may be staffed by municipal employees. Others are run by nonprofit
   societies.

   Performance measures
  There is currently limited statistical data available on museums, though Tourism BC collects visitor
  surveys and Statistics Canada collects information about visitation of cultural sites.
      The following quantitative performance measures have been defined by the Museum Directors Group
  to compare institutional performance across Canada:
      • Effectiveness
              o Market share—population of market area divided by number of customers
              o Per visitor gross sales income—number of visitors divided by gross sales income (admis-
                  sions, gift shop, facility rentals, etc.)
              o Self-sufficiency—non-government revenue divided by total revenues
      • Efficiency
              o Cost per visitor—total operating expenditures divided by number of visitors
              o Marketing—salaries and direct marketing expenses divided by admissions revenue
              o Human resources—salary and benefits divided by total revenues
  Other examples of performance measures are:
      • Diversity of visitors as expressed in visitor surveys—match between museum’s visitor profile and
          the population distribution of the city
      • Percentage of visitors satisfied as expressed in surveys
      • Number of referred and non-referred publications by staff per year
