                                                                                        HUMAN SERVICES       145


     •    Number of presentations to professional colleagues per year
     •    Number of professional presentations to external audiences
     •    Number of information requests pertaining to the collection per year
     •    Number of person days of training undertaken by museum staff
     •    Percentage of salaries spent on training per year
     •    Number of volunteer hours per year

Observations
Museums are not a major local government activity. As with libraries, local volunteers and nonprofit
societies play an important role in delivering museum services, especially in smaller towns.


9.5       Public Health
Regional health authorities were established by the provincial government in 2001 to govern the provision
of local health services throughout the province. Each authority has a department responsible for public
health that focuses on health improvement, disease, injury and disability prevention programs, environ-
mental health, and health emergency management programs. Strategies used in public health are health
promotion, health protection, preventive interventions, health assessments, and disease surveillance.
Public health programs include food safety and security, air and water quality, tobacco use, and immuni-
zation for children and travel. Through bylaws, programs, and services, municipalities and regional
districts still play an important role in public health.

Nature of the service
Protecting public health through immunization, food inspection, and other forms of disease control and
eradication is a classic public good because the benefits accrue to everyone. The potential for widespread
effects from public health problems and the localized nature of many sanitation problems creates both a
province-wide and a local dimension to public health services.
    While traditional public health activities are of a public goods nature, the public health divisions of
health authorities also provide direct care services, including prenatal care, nursing, and home visits for
seniors and people with disabilities. These activities tend to overlap with traditional hospital-based patient
care. Direct care is very labour intensive and involves face-to-face interaction. The quality of the personal
interaction between the recipient and the provider is important. Managing direct care requires different
techniques than the more traditional responsibilities of inspection and disease control.

Provision framework
Organizational arrangements for policymaking in public health are set out in the Health Act, Public
Health Act, Health Authorities Act, Local Government Act, Community Charter, and School Act. The
Public Health Act, passed in 2008, includes a number of new requirements for the involvement of local
government in public health. The Act specifies that local governments must be consulted in the creation
of regional public health plans and can also require local government to consider the regional public
health plans in their strategic or operational planning process. The Act also requires local government
action if they become aware of a health hazard or impediment. Subject to the Health Act, municipalities27
and regional districts28 have the power to adopt bylaws to regulate public health. Local government
involvement in public health policymaking includes smoking bylaws and water fluoridation. In practice,

27
     Granted in 8(3) of the Community Charter.

28
     Granted in 523(1) of Local Government Act.
