146    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   public health policymaking is primarily the responsibility of medical health officers employed by regional
   health authorities, which cooperate with other local governmental bodies in public health regulation.

   Production arrangements
   Most public health services in B.C. are directly produced by the regional health authorities that were
   established in 2001. Still, regional districts and municipalities continue to provide some public health
   functions.

   Performance measurement
   There are broad social, economic, and other factors that contribute to "healthy communities,” making
   measuring the performance of public health difficult. It is difficult to attribute an outcome to an interven-
   tion especially over an extended period of time. As well, different levels of government and divisions of
   the health care system are involved in health issues, therefore, it is difficult to attribute outcomes solely to
   the domain of public health. The provincial government is currently working with the regional health
   authorities to develop performance measures for public health activities and outcomes.
       It is possible to measure and compare the inputs into the public health system, including level of
   funding, staff time, size and type of facilities, and equipment, with outputs and specific activities. Some
   of the outcomes of public health’s main activities that can be measured are parental awareness of vaccine
   benefits, number of children immunized, reduced burden of vaccine-preventable disease in immunized
   children, and reduced prevalence of vaccine-preventable disease. Examples of performance measures
   include:
       • Immunization rate for all children at 24 months of age
       • Percentage of smokers or recent quitters age 18 and older who received advice to quit smoking
            from a health professional
       • Documented cases of communicable disease related to food-service establishments
       • Quarterly and annual restaurant inspection rates
       • Percentage of failed restaurant inspections brought to standard within 10 days
       • Level/concentration of pollutants in ambient air

   Observations
  Public health services absorb a small proportion of local government spending, although in some areas,
  like the Capital region, they are an important part of regional district activities. For most local govern-
  ments, public health remains somewhat apart from other local government activities and is more
  integrated into the overall health system, both provincially and in relation to other health service delivery
  organizations, than they are into other local government activities.


   9.6     Social Housing
   Housing affordability for people who wish to own a home and for renters has been a serious concern in
   British Columbia for many years. It is of particular concern in heavily populated areas such as the
   Vancouver and Victoria regions where housing prices have been among the highest in Canada. Housing
   affordability challenges are not unique to the province as it is estimated that 1.7 million Canadians
   allocate more than 30 percent of their total income to shelter. According to the 2006 census 465,865
   British Columbians (11.3 percent of the population) spent 30 percent or more of their household income
   on housing costs.
       Over the years, all levels of government have developed a variety of policies, programs, and strate-
   gies aimed at addressing the problem. One of the most popular government approaches has been
   investment in the construction and administration of social housing developments aimed at providing safe
