                                                                                      HUMAN SERVICES          147


and suitable housing for low-income individuals and families. Although this practice was common from
the 1950s to the 1990s, funding cuts at the federal and provincial levels have resulted in a decline in the
number of new social housing units provided by the governments.

Nature of the service
Social housing is a welfare function that involves the redistribution of wealth through subsidies provided
by the federal and provincial governments. The service can be politically sensitive, for example, when a
local community group objects to government plans to locate social housing units in the neighbourhood,
and it tends to involve face-to-face interaction between tenants and landlord representatives or among
members of a housing cooperative. While the benefits to individuals and families who are helped can be
easily measured, other benefits of home ownership and secure housing are harder to measure.
     As of October 2007, government-assisted housing accounted for nearly six percent of the province’s
total housing. This proportion is projected to rise with the continuation of the Provincial Homelessness
Initiative and Housing Matters BC programs. The provincial government also provides housing support in
the form of private market rent subsidies, homeownership vouchers, and assisted-living services,
especially in relation to seniors. There are also plans to increase funding to support services for social-
housing tenants suffering from mental illness, addiction, and severe physical disabilities.

Provision framework
In 2004 the Canada-British Columbia Affordable Housing Program Agreement replaced several previous
Canada grant programs to increase house subsidy programs. This program provides $130 million from
Canada which must be matched by British Columbia. This program targets homelessness and is often
accompanied by drug or alcohol treatment programs. Individual project proposals are developed by both
local governments and not-for-profit social service agencies. These programs are in addition to social
housing programs.
     The province provides social housing in B.C. through two Crown agencies. The Provincial Rental
Housing Corporation, incorporated in 1961, holds provincial properties for social and other low-cost
housing, including lands leased for long terms to nonprofit societies. The net book value of the properties
in 2007 was about $358 million. The British Columbia Housing Management Commission (BC Housing),
established in 1967, is responsible for developing new social housing under the HOMES BC program,
building and managing special group homes, administering about 8,000 units developed under the
federal-provincial housing programs of 1953–93, and administering subsidy and operating agreements
related to some 26,000 units managed by nonprofit societies and cooperatives. BC Housing’s budget for
2007–08 was $506.1 million, which included a contribution of $328.3 million from the province and an
additional $139.8 million from the federal government. The agency has allocated $256.9 million to the
continued construction, maintenance, and operation of social housing units. The remaining funds, $248.2
million, are used to provide other housing support programs, such as private market rental subsidies, and
assisted-living services for seniors and people with disabilities.
     Local government involvement in the provision of social housing has taken a variety of forms, includ-
ing such policy and regulatory measures as:
     • the inclusion of affordable housing provisions in regional growth strategies and official commu-
         nity plans, as required by the Local Government Act;
     • the amendment of zoning bylaws to permit such things as increased densities in new or existing
         residential neighbourhoods, housing above shops, secondary suites, small lot developments,
         manufactured home parks, comprehensive development zones, density bonusing, housing agree-
         ments and the required inclusion of some affordable housing in new developments;
     • the adoption of regulatory controls over the conversion of rental housing;
