148    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       •   the adoption of health, safety, and comfort standards for rental housing;
       •   the provision of social or special-needs housing in some new developments through “housing
           agreements”;
       •   the “fast-tracking” of approvals for affordable housing proposals; and
       •   the adoption of policies for special-needs housing.
   In addition, some local governments have become more directly involved in providing social housing.
   The GVRD and the CRD have each established a corporation for this purpose and the City of Vancouver
   provides social housing through its Housing Centre. A growing number of municipalities have begun to
   implement new land use practices that promote the sustainable development of affordable housing
   including social housing, with the assistance of provincial programs designed to reduce the rate of
   homelessness and help households at imminent risk of homelessness.

   Production arrangements
   The planning and design of projects that include social housing is typically completed by architectural
   and engineering consultants, and the projects are built by contractors engaged through a tendering
   process. Once built and occupied, a project may be managed and maintained by the owner’s staff, a tenant
   cooperative, a contracted property manager, or other contracted personnel.

   Performance evaluation
  Performance measurement and evaluation has become an increasingly important to social housing in
  Canada. Unfortunately, there are many methodological challenges to measuring the effectiveness of social
  housing programs and currently there is no universally accepted framework for evaluating social housing.
  As well, many social housing programs include support services such as addictions counselling,
  employment and education programs, and various health care services, and the abundance of these
  programs makes it difficult to isolate outcomes attributed to social housing alone. It could be argued that
  the provision of such assistive services are a direct result of social housing, and therefore social housing
  does have a positive impact on individual tenants and the community as a whole.
      Academic researchers interested in this issue have stressed the importance of identifying measurable
  and logically consistent objectives prior to developing an effective system of performance measurement.
  There is debate, however, as to whether outcomes should be measured on an individual or community
  basis, and some countries such as the United States and Australia, have attempted to evaluate social
  housing using both scales with some degree of success.
      In the Australian state of Victoria, performance measures for social housing have been created regard-
  ing governance, agency management, financial viability, housing management, maintenance, and tenancy
  management. Tenancy management involves measures issues of allocation, accessibility, affordability of
  rent, security, client services, and tenant participation.

   Observations
   An underlying premise of government housing programs is that the incomes of many people are too low
   for the private market to meet the community’s housing needs or aspirations. For 50 years, Canada
   Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) has provided programs of mortgage insurance that make it
   possible for many people who could not otherwise afford to buy a home with a low down payment.
   Similarly, federal-provincial social housing programs were introduced because housing costs are too high
   for many citizens.
       The problem of housing affordability in B.C., especially in some heavily populated areas, has been
   exacerbated by a number of factors, such as rates of population and household growth that have exceeded
   the rate of new housing construction for many years, land speculation, geographical and public policy
