                                                            REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS               151




 Chapter Ten
Regulatory and Development Functions


T
        he preceding chapters have discussed the delivery of services to a community. This chapter
        examines functions that regulate the activities of some members of the community for the benefit
        of others. One of the most important functions is the management of development, which includes
a variety of regulatory and planning activities.
    Achieving a balance between benefits and costs of regulation is more difficult than with most expen-
diture programs because regulation is relatively inexpensive to the government, but the major costs are
borne by those who are regulated and not seen by the council as an expenditure they can compare with
other expenditures. Performance measurement is also difficult, with most measures being of processes
and costs of processes, not the ultimate outcomes from the regulation.


10.1 Regulatory Functions
Regulation is typically a function reserved to governments. Like imposing taxes, the power to prohibit or
limit what people can do with their property, livelihood, or other activities, or to require people to do
specific things, are not powers generally given to individuals or non-government entities except for the
land use regulation authority provided by the government to condominium regimes. Most forms of local
government have authority to create specific rules for services they provide or in relation to property they
own. Beyond that, the broadest scope of regulatory authority for local governments is provided to
municipalities. In addition to regulation of development, regional districts have a limited number of the
same regulatory powers as municipalities, such as building regulation, public health, and nuisance
control. Local trust committees of the Islands Trust are limited to authority to regulate development in the
trust area, with authority that is much the same as regional districts’ authority to regulate development in
other rural areas.

Spheres of regulation
Prior to the Community Charter, municipalities were able to only enact bylaws to regulate matters which
provincial legislation specifically identified. Over time, the list of permitted regulatory authority became
extensive. Under the Community Charter, municipalities have broad powers to regulate and in most cases
prohibit and/or impose requirements in relation to a number of broad areas or “spheres.” Those spheres
are divided into those which are autonomous, in which municipalities can choose independently whether
or not to act, and those which are concurrent, which require some form of provincial involvement,
whether by specific approval, agreement, or through general regulation, before a municipality can act on
that matter.
     Areas in which municipalities have autonomy to regulate, prohibit, and impose requirements are:
     • municipal services;
     • public places;
     • trees;
     • firecrackers, fireworks, and explosives;
     • bows and arrows, knives, and other weapons;
