152       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



          •   cemeteries;
          •   crematoriums;
          •   columbariums and mausoleums and the disposition of the dead;
          •   the health, safety, or protection of persons or property in relation to specific things, such as trailer
              courts, manufactured home parks, and matters within the scope of the Fire Services Act;
          •   the protection and enhancement of the wellbeing of its community in relation to specific matters,
              such as nuisances, noise, and unsanitary conditions;
          •   animals, except for wildlife;
          •   building and other structures, except standards that are, or could be dealt with by provincial build-
              ing regulations; and
          •   removal and deposit of soil or other material, except prohibitions on soil removal or on deposit of
              soil that is contaminated or of a particular quality.
      Areas in which municipalities have concurrent authority to regulate, prohibit, and impose requirements
      are:
           • public health;
           • protection of the natural environment;
           • wildlife;
           • building standards that are or could be dealt with by provincial building regulations; and
           • prohibitions on soil removal or on deposit of soil that is contaminated or of a particular quality.
      Where regional districts have some similar areas of authority (e.g., public health, building regulation),
      those areas are also concurrent.
           Municipalities are also able to regulate businesses, to regulate and impose requirements for certain
      matters related to signs and other advertising devices, and to regulate and prohibit in relation to the
      discharge of firearms. Municipalities also have important regulatory powers by virtue of legislation other
      than the Community Charter or Local Government Act, in areas such as traffic and motor vehicles and
      solid waste management.
           To be effective, regulatory authority is accompanied by important ancillary powers. Under the Com-
      munity Charter, municipal bylaws may establish different rules for different classes of persons, places,
      activities, property, or things, and may also differentiate for different areas of the municipality, times,
      conditions, or circumstances. Municipalities may establish a system of licences, permits, or approvals in
      relation to any matter they regulate, including providing for the suspension and cancellation of those
      permissions, attaching conditions to them, charging fees for them, and prohibiting an activity unless
      permission is obtained. As well, two or more municipalities may establish intermunicipal schemes for any
      matters, enabling, for example, a small municipality to have a larger municipality apply its animal control
      bylaw in the smaller municipality, or a number of municipalities in a region to join together in an
      intermunicipal business licensing scheme. Intermunicipal business licensing operates in various areas of
      the province, including the Victoria area and parts of the Okanagan, especially for mobile businesses.

   Business regulation
   Most of the rules that businesses must meet are set by the provincial government but the Community
   Charter gives municipalities general authority to regulate business activities, including commercial,
   industrial, professional, personal, or other service businesses. Municipalities have authority to prohibit
   businesses or impose requirements on them in only limited circumstances using business regulation
   authority, for example, prohibiting exhibitions or requiring second-hand dealers to notify police of goods
   they take in. In practice, local governments use their zoning authority to prohibit certain types of
   businesses from certain areas of their jurisdictions. In addition to the general authority to regulate
