                                                             REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS               153


businesses, municipalities may also regulate carriers of persons or things, such as taxis or delivery trucks,
to the extent that they are not regulated under another act, such as the Passenger Transportation Act.
Municipalities may also license commercial vehicles, subject to a variety of exemptions and conditions.
     Recognizing that business regulation can directly intrude on the livelihood of citizens, municipalities
must provide an opportunity for representations to council by those who consider themselves affected
before exercising this authority, and must give written reasons for refusal of a business licence.
     These ancillary powers are most frequently used in relation to business regulation. Perhaps best
known are municipal bylaws requiring business licences, which in years past appeared in practice to be
more revenue-raising measures than regulatory ones. At one time, the provincial government put limits on
the amount of business licence fees and restricted local governments from charging fees on businesses
from adjacent municipalities under most conditions, but these provisions were eliminated when the
Municipal Act was reformed in 1999. The Community Charter now allows municipalities to charge fees
to finance the implementation of regulations, but under common law, those fees cannot be taxes and must
bear some relation to the costs of regulation.

Regulation of development
A local government’s physical development functions can be divided into two groups. The first group
includes development activities undertaken by the public sector, such as the planning, design, construc-
tion, operation, and maintenance of the infrastructure of pipes, roads, parks, and other facilities. The
second group includes the regulation of development activities undertaken by the private sector through
the use of building regulation, land use planning, zoning, subdivision control, and related activities. These
are the most extensive regulatory activities undertaken by local governments and most of this chapter is
devoted to them.


10.2 Building Regulation
Public regulation of the design, construction, alteration, and demolition of buildings is considered to be a
protective service, as noted in Chapter 7, because it is primarily concerned with structural, fire, and other
types of public safety related to buildings. Some communities use it as a development control tool that is
related to zoning and similar activities for regulating physical development.

Policy framework
The primary instrument for regulating building in the province is the British Columbia Building Code,
adapted from Canada’s national building and plumbing codes to reflect conditions in B.C. Other
instruments include acts or regulations related to health, fire services, electrical work and equipment, gas
systems and equipment, elevating devices, and boilers. Policymaking has historically been the responsi-
bility of the ministry responsible for municipal affairs but in 2008 was administered under the ministry
responsible for housing and building standards, which, through the BC Safety Authority, also administers
the regulation of gas, elevating devices, boilers, and most electrical installations. Local governments
administer the regulation of building, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and in a few cases,
electrical installations.
     Before 1996, municipalities and regional districts were empowered but not required to adopt bylaws
for regulating buildings and other structures. In that year, Part 21 of the Municipal Act was amended to
empower the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations that establish a uniform building code
for the province. However, the procedures to be followed in administering building regulations and
enforcing the Code were left up to the local government so that, for example, a regional district might
decide that the extent to which it enforces the Code in remote areas should be limited due to cost
considerations. Nevertheless, the effect of the 1996 amendment was that all owners of buildings in B.C.
