154        LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



  are responsible for ensuring that the buildings comply with either the uniform code or, in accordance with
  the Vancouver Charter, the Vancouver code.
       In 2008, the B.C. government announced that every new building in B.C. will have to meet new
  “green” standards for energy and water efficiency. New houses, multifamily residential buildings under
  five storeys, and small commercial and industrial buildings must meet new insulation requirements, or
  their equivalent, to achieve an EnerGuide rating of 77.29 New high-rise residential buildings and larger
  commercial buildings will have to satisfy internationally recognized standards of energy efficiency. Low-
  flow toilets and other water-saving plumbing fixtures will be mandatory. The announcement also
  indicated that the province is exploring additional ways to reduce the impact of buildings on the environ-
  ment by further improving water conservation, reducing energy use, and promoting the use of more
  environmentally friendly construction materials.

   Implementation and enforcement
  Local government building regulations are generally implemented by building inspectors who have
  appropriate technical education, experience, or both and, under the 1997 Building Officials’ Association
  Act, may have the title “Registered Building Official.” Their activities include providing consultation and
  advice to building owners, designers, and contractors; reviewing plans for compliance with regulations;
  processing applications for building, plumbing, demolition, and possibly other permits such as signs;
  issuing permits; conducting inspections of work at various stages of progress; and the issuing of
  occupancy permits when work has been satisfactorily completed. Inspection staff may also respond to
  complaints about such matters as the failure of a secondary suite to comply with regulations.
       In a larger municipality, the building inspection department staff may include specialists for building,
  plumbing and sometimes electrical or gas inspection. In a smaller municipality, a building inspector may
  also act as a bylaw enforcement officer. Some municipalities allow owners of buildings to rely on
  certification of plans by architects and engineers who meet certain training qualifications and other
  requirements such as having liability insurance.

   Regulation and liability
  Sections 289 and 290 of the Local Government Act provide that municipalities and regional districts
  cannot be held liable for damages or loss resulting from a failure to enforce building regulations or from
  issuing a building permit for a development that does not comply with the regulations, as long as the
  permit has been issued when a professional engineer or architect has certified that the plans comply with
  an applicable code and the municipality has indicated in writing that it had relied on this certification.
  These provisions address certain questions of legal liability that have concerned local governments for
  many years, especially when some kind of notable building failure has occurred, such as the “leaky
  condominium” phenomenon of the 1990s.
      Another response to the liability issue, along with the Homeowner Protection Office, has been the
  adoption of a procedure aimed at more clearly indicating that the onus for ensuring compliance rests with
  the owners and designers of buildings. The procedure, which was incorporated in the B.C. Building Code
  in 1992, provides for mandatory letters of assurance from the owner and registered design professionals
  that a building complies with all regulations. In addition to clarifying questions of legal liability, this and
  other requirements imposed by building professionals, are seen as ways to simplify and expedite a permit
  application process that can become very complex and lengthy, especially in larger jurisdictions.

   29
            The EnerGuide rating system was developed by Natural Resource Canada’s Office of Energy Efficiency (OEE). The rating process involves
      the engagement of a qualified energy advisor who analyses the house plans, recommends energy-saving upgrades and works with the builder to
      identify cost-effective options. When the work is complete, the advisor verifies the applied energy upgrades and performs a blower door test. The
      home eventually receives its EnerGuide rating and a label for display on the furnace or electrical box.
