                                                            REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS            155


    In 1987 the Municipal Insurance Association was created in response to a liability insurance crisis
under which local governments were unable to afford the insurance necessary to cover their operations,
part of which was brought about by liability problems associated with poorly constructed buildings. The
association is a nonprofit insurance cooperative that pools common risks for its members. The associa-
tion’s key purposes are: (1) to maintain the liability insurance coverage needed for member’s financial
security; (2) to stabilize liability insurance costs; and (3) to provide risk management education to assist
members in preventing crime. More than 160 municipalities and regional districts insure through the
association.

Performance measures and financing
The desired outcome from building regulation is buildings that are safe and minimize damage from events
like fires and earthquakes. This is a continually upgrading process, where one learns not only from work
in laboratories but also from natural events. This kind of research is generally beyond the capability of
local governments and that is why most of the codes are prepared by national and provincial bodies.
     At the local government level, performance measures include the cost of processing a permit, the time
it takes to process a permit, and the time it takes an inspector to respond to a call to undertake an
inspection. Time is an important variable because construction delays are very costly to builders.
     It is generally assumed that builders should pay the cost of the permitting process. This facilitates a
balance between the cost of providing the service and the importance of time to the builders. If builders
complain that the time to process permits takes too long, or that there is too great a delay when inspec-
tions are called for, the local government can raise the fees for permits and use the revenue to add to
building department inspection capacity so they can perform their tasks more quickly.


10.3 Land Use Regulation
Planning, zoning, and subdivision control are the most extensive regulatory activities undertaken by
municipalities, regional districts, and the Islands Trust. The primary powers are in the Local Government
Act and the Land Title Act.

Objectives of land use regulation
Land use regulation has three general objectives and many specific ones. The first general objective is to
help private developers and local government officials predict future land use patterns with some degree
of certainty. The planning function is associated with this objective.
     Some knowledge of what kinds of land uses are likely to locate in an area facilitates building con-
struction decisions. Private developers and businesspeople benefit from knowing with some certainty
what the future uses of an adjacent property may be. A residential subdivision developer, for instance,
would like to be sure nearby land uses will not be detrimental to the subdivision, and a person establish-
ing a business may want it to be close to related businesses in areas with good traffic flow. Local
governments also benefit from having a more certain future. By being able to predict future land use
patterns they can plan for the installation of watermains, sewers, highways, and other public facilities.
The quest for certainty has always been a major concern of land use regulation because land uses require
large capital investments that will last and be used for a long time.
     A second general objective prevents incompatible uses from locating next to one another. The zoning
function allows a community to control what uses are permitted and where they may locate, thereby
providing for compatible adjacent uses. In general this has meant that uses generating noise or traffic are
kept away from residential areas, especially single-family neighbourhoods. The underlying assumption is
that, unless adjacent land uses are controlled, undesirable external effects will abound.
