156    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       A third general objective is to facilitate the orderly extension of public facilities and services to grow-
   ing or changing areas. Local governments have a major concern for the adequacy of utilities, access
   roads, and other characteristics of specific developments. Through land use regulation, especially
   subdivision control, citizens may be protected from the expensive burden of upgrading an inadequate
   development. Thus, the three objectives of land use regulation—greater certainty about the future,
   avoiding negative external effects, and assuring an adequate infrastructure for new developments—have
   corresponding regulatory activities—planning, zoning, and subdivision control.
       Within this context many municipalities and regional districts adopt specific objectives and guide-
   lines, including economic development, social objectives including reducing the impact of illegal drug
   use or creating affordable housing, heritage preservation, and reducing automobile congestion with spatial
   patterns that encourage public transit usage. The entire area of land use regulation involves both planning
   and implementing those plans through regulations.

   Public information and participation
  The Local Government Act includes a number of provisions for public information and participation in
  the land use regulatory process. There must be extensive consultation and a public hearing in the process
  of preparing and adopting a regional growth strategy. A public hearing, for which notice must be given in
  a specified manner, must be held after first reading but before third reading of a community plan or
  zoning bylaw. Although they are not stated in the legislation, the courts have read in a number of
  common-law procedural and due process requirements into the public hearing requirement; for example,
  all reports that the council or board will be considering when making a rezoning decision must be made
  available to the public before the public hearing.
       A local government must clearly define its regulatory procedures in a bylaw, must make available to
  the public a list of all bylaws, proposed bylaws and permits that have been issued, and may publish a
  procedures manual for public information.
       The mandatory provisions in the Acts and common law are minimum requirements for public infor-
  mation and participation. Local governments not only comply with these provisions but may also use
  other methods such as onsite signage, open houses, workshops, surveys, focus groups, and special
  advisory committees to enhance public information and participation in the land use regulatory process.
  Sometimes these additional public information and participation opportunities are implemented on a case-
  by-case basis, and sometimes they are established as standard practice through the local government’s
  procedures bylaw.
       The mandatory consultation for various aspects of land use regulation may also require consultation
  with neighbouring jurisdictions. For example, development of an official community plan by a municipal-
  ity requires consideration of early and ongoing consultation with its regional district board, any adjacent
  local governments, and provincial and federal governments.

   First Nations consultation
  Aboriginal rights, including aboriginal title and treaty rights are recognized and protected under the
  Constitution Act 1982. The province has a legal duty to ensure consultation with First Nations takes place
  and, where appropriate, provide for accommodation. The courts have indicated that the province’s duty to
  consult is not just limited to Crown land, but also applies to Crown decisions made on private land in
  certain circumstances. The courts have also determined that the province may delegate procedural aspects
  of First Nations consultation to third parties.
      The Local Government Act includes a number of provisions for specific consultations with First Na-
  tions in the land use regulatory process. Examples include the development of an official community plan
