                                                              REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS             157


(OCP), the development of a regional growth strategy (RGS), and for a local government request to
provide statutory approval, such as for a municipal boundary extension or a regional district bylaw.


10.4 Planning
Planning in B.C. occurs at provincial, regional, and community levels. Provincial land-related planning
primarily relates to uses of Crown land. Processes that have been important in the regional and commu-
nity planning context include the land and resource management plans prepared for various regions of the
province and the designation of new provincial parks and protected areas. Increasingly, the province is
directly involving First Nations in provincial land use planning for the lands in their traditional territories.
Some provincial land use planning and regulation regimens do apply to private land and restrict the
latitude that local governments have in their own planning. These include the agricultural land reserve
(ALR), private managed forest land (MFL), and riparian area protection. For example, having set aside
certain lands only for farm use, the ALR, through cabinet regulation, defines what may occur on those
lands by limiting local government from using its zoning authority to prohibit certain types of uses and
activities which the provincial government considers to be linked to agriculture.
     Regional planning activities include the preparation of regional growth strategies, conducting re-
search related to regional economic development, growth pressures and other regional issues, and
coordination of shared regional services. Regional districts are also responsible for community-level
planning for unincorporated areas.
     At the community level, planning activities include the preparation of official community plans, or
sometimes, unofficial plans, at the neighbourhood or community level. In addition to land use and related
physical development, such plans may address such subjects as heritage conservation, social develop-
ment, economic development, and most recently, the greenhouse gas emission target that must be
included in OCPs and RGSs.

History
Modern city planning in North America started at the turn of the century with the City Beautiful
movement, which was stimulated by the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair. The work was initially undertaken
by voluntary civic groups who were mainly concerned with urban sanitation, park planning, garden city
developments, zoning, and subdivision regulation. These groups evolved into formal advisory commis-
sions that realized that, if planning was to be effective, it had to be implemented by civic administrations.
Eventually, land use planning and regulation became accepted as basic local government functions and, as
urban areas continued to grow, the need for regional planning became more apparent. British Columbia
passed the Town Planning Act in 1925, which facilitated municipal planning to supplement the zoning
activities in which a few municipalities were already engaged.
     Regional planning in B.C. dates back to the creation of a Vancouver regional sewerage committee in
1911 and a regional water district in 1926. In 1937, municipal representatives from Vancouver, Burnaby,
Coquitlam, Port Moody, West Vancouver, and North Vancouver created a voluntary planning association
for the Lower Mainland. Provincial legislation permitting regional planning was passed in 1948.
     In 1949 the Lower Mainland Regional Planning Board was created. Its major achievement was a
1966 regional plan which laid out policies for dealing with forecasted growth. Other regional planning
bodies that predated regional districts included the Capital Region Planning Board, created in 1951, the
Greater Nanaimo Regional Planning Board (1956), and a Thompson-Okanagan planning body created in
the 1960s. These bodies were eventually superseded by the regional districts in their areas.
     From 1965 to 1983, regional planning was a mandate of regional districts which attempted to recon-
cile the policies of various municipalities and unincorporated areas within a coherent plan for the future.
