158    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   Within the regional planning framework, municipalities created their own official community plans and
   regional governments assisted local electoral area directors and their advisory planning commissions to
   create official settlement plans for unincorporated areas. The municipal official community plans,
   regional district official settlement plans and regional plans were worked on until they were consistent
   with one another.
        Official regional plans were eliminated in 1983. The apparent reasons for this were that regional plans
   were being used by some municipalities to control development in other municipalities and that, in any
   case, they were considered to be duplications of community and settlement plans. A form of voluntary,
   cooperative regional planning was restored in 1989 when amendments to the Municipal Act provided for
   “regional district development services consisting of coordination, research, and analytical services
   relating to the development of the regional district.” In 1995, legislation providing for the preparation of
   regional growth strategies strengthened the regional district role in regional planning, although not to the
   level that existed before 1983.

   Regional planning in the Lower Mainland
   When regional districts were created in 1965–67, the regional planning function in the Lower Mainland
   was divided among the Greater Vancouver, Central Fraser Valley, Dewdney-Alouette, and Fraser-Cheam
   regional districts (the latter three were merged into the Fraser Valley Regional District in 1995).
   Nevertheless, the four jointly developed a 1980 Plan for the Lower Mainland of British Columbia that
   was adopted by each regional district as its official regional plan. Not all of the policies were imple-
   mented, but the planning process was a major contributor to increasing public awareness of future growth
   problems for the Lower Mainland, especially in transportation.
       In the GVRD itself, a Livable Region Plan (LRP) had been adopted in 1975 and continued to serve as
   a main point of reference until the late 1980s, well after official regional plans had been abolished in
   1983. The main elements of this plan included the establishment of core areas with associated job targets,
   corresponding allocations of residential growth targets, the creation of regional town centres, the
   preservation of farmland, parkland, and views, and the establishment of a light rail system connecting the
   town centres and core areas.
       By 1989, the rail system had been built in the form of SkyTrain and the GVRD decided to update the
   LRP. The process and results were documented in a series of reports, notably Choosing Our Future
   (1990), Creating Our Future (1990) and the Livable Region Strategic Plan (1996). The LRSP was
   formally adopted by the GVRD board in January 1996 and was “deemed to be a regional growth strategy”
   by the municipal affairs minister two weeks later. Action to implement the plan’s transportation policies
   was taken with the creation in 1998–99 of TransLink, the Lower Mainland transportation authority. In
   addition to the consensus among the 18 GVRD municipalities reflected in the plan, there is an agreement
   with the Fraser Valley Regional District to ensure that the GVRD and FVRD growth strategies are in
   harmony with each other. The Greater Vancouver area has a long, continuing history of regional planning.

   Regional growth strategies
   Regional growth strategy legislation is contained in the Local Government Act. The process for develop-
   ing a regional growth strategy reflects the federative nature of regional districts, and requires establishing
   a strategic consensus among the various municipalities and electoral area directors regarding growth and
   development in the region.
        As shown in Exhibit 10–1, the legislated purposes and content of a regional growth strategy extend
   beyond traditional land use, transportation, and utility system concerns to embrace a broader spectrum of
   growth management issues, including environmental protection, resource preservation, economic
