160       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA




   development, environmental pollution, housing, water quality, and energy supply. A main objective is to
   avoid urban sprawl. As of 2011 all regional growth strategies must establish greenhouse gas reduction
   targets and identify actions that will be taken to meet those targets.
        Exhibit 10–1 also indicates that a regional growth strategy must apply to a whole regional district
   unless the province allows it to apply to another area, such as part of a regional district or several regional
   districts that have jointly developed a strategy.
        The legislation encourages the voluntary participation of all affected local governments in the prepa-
   ration of regional growth strategies. Thus, unless explicitly required by the Lieutenant Governor in
   Council, it is not mandatory for a regional district to prepare a regional growth strategy. If a regional
   district board passes a resolution to prepare a strategy, it must then provide for consultations with the
   municipalities and other parties affected by or vitally interested in it. Before it can be formally adopted,
   which must be done through a bylaw, the strategy must be accepted by all of the affected local govern-
   ments except for very minor changes or, where efforts at gaining such acceptance voluntarily have failed,
   the issues must be resolved through a dispute resolution process which is binding on all parties.
        Where the preparation of a regional growth strategy is warranted but the regional district has failed to
   act voluntarily, the provincial government reserves the right to require that a strategy be prepared and
   adopted. The province has ordered that a regional growth strategy be developed by the newly created
   Comox Valley Regional District and it is underway.
        By 2008, regional growth strategies had been adopted for:
        • Greater Vancouver Regional District (adopted in February 1996),
        • Regional District of Nanaimo (updated June 2003),
        • Thompson-Nicola Regional District (adopted in May 2000),
        • Regional District of Central Okanagan (adopted in June 2000),
        • Capital Regional District (adopted in August 2003), and
        • Fraser Valley Regional District (adopted in October 2004).
      Four other regional districts are currently in the process of developing their regional growth strategy
      including Squamish-Lillooet Regional District (initiated in 2003), Okanagan-Similkameen Regional
      District (initiated in 2004), Regional District of North Okanagan (initiated in spring 2007), and Comox
      Valley Regional District (initiated as part of its creation from the split of the Comox-Strathcona Regional
      District in 2008).

   Community planning
   Official community plans (OCPs) are the formal process by which councils and boards articulate their
   strategy and policies for physical development in the community. OCPs are adopted by bylaw, and once
   such a plan has been adopted all future bylaws and public works in the planning area must be consistent
   with it or require an amendment.
        OCPs are prepared by municipalities, regional districts and local trust committees of the Islands
   Trust. The provisions for municipal and regional district OCPs are contained in the Local Government
   Act. As indicated in Exhibit 10–2, an OCP must include provisions for land use, residential development,
   sand and gravel deposits, special land use restrictions, infrastructure, public facilities such as schools and
   parks, housing policies, and other matters that the minister may require or authorize. An OCP may also
   include social policies, farming policies, environmental policies, designated development or temporary
   use permit areas, and designated heritage conservation areas. As of June 2010 all OCPs will be required
   to include targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the planning area, and actions and
   policies to achieve the stated targets. An OCP must contain a regional context statement if it includes an
   area to which a regional growth strategy applies.
