162    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   as that for municipalities, unless the minister provides otherwise. The plan must be submitted to the
   minister for approval before the board can adopt the bylaw.

   Heritage conservation
  In addition to designating heritage conservation areas in an OCP, the Local Government Act empowers a
  local government to conserve heritage properties by establishing a community heritage commission,
  creating a register of heritage properties, officially recognizing the heritage value or character of a
  property, and temporarily or permanently protecting heritage properties from actions that would
  inappropriately change them. Local governments have considerable power to enforce heritage property
  regulations but, in practice, it is unusual to designate a heritage property without the consent of the owner.
  The legislation requires that the owner be compensated for any reduction in market value caused by
  heritage designation and provides for transfers of development rights.
      The heritage conservation legislation, which dates from 1995, was a result of increasing concerns
  about the impact of modern development on properties of particular architectural and historical value in
  B.C. communities and a general interest among British Columbians in the issue. Communities that have
  undertaken heritage conservation programs include North Cowichan (Chemainus), Cumberland,
  Ladysmith, Nanaimo, Nelson, Revelstoke, the City of North Vancouver, and Victoria.

   Social planning
   In addition to their powers to include social policies in an OCP, municipalities and regional districts may
   undertake social planning services. Municipalities which have done so include Burnaby, Kamloops,
   Vancouver, and Victoria. The areas of concern might include such things as social trends, community
   development, intercultural understanding, cultural activities, child care, disadvantaged citizens, refugee
   and immigration matters, substance abuse, juvenile prostitution, detention policies, housing affordability,
   and the social use of heritage buildings. Social planning services supported by government grants may
   also be provided by one or more local nonprofit societies, such as a social planning council or community
   services agency.

   Economic development
   While the subject of economic development must be addressed in a regional growth strategy, there is no
   specific requirement to include it in an OCP. Nevertheless, many local governments have included
   economic development policies in their OCPs and have developed complementary strategies.
       The elements of an economic development strategy typically include an analysis of the existing situa-
   tion, trends and issues, the identification of economic growth possibilities, the articulation of objectives,
   and the development of policies and action plans for achieving the objectives, including establishment of
   a government department or economic development commission to implement the strategy.

   Neighbourhood planning
   Provision for neighbourhood or local area plans can be found in most OCPs for larger municipalities. In
   some cases, such as the District of Saanich, the OCP consists of a general plan and a number of local area
   plans which, like the general plan, have been adopted by bylaw and may take precedence over the general
   plan in the case of disagreements between them. Alternatively, a municipality such as the City of
   Victoria, which has a single overall OCP, may have unofficial neighbourhood plans that have been
   adopted by resolution but may be as influential as the OCP itself in guiding future development. The City
   of Vancouver is unique in that it has a series of neighbourhood plans but no overall OCP as such.
