                                                            REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS             163


Rural land use bylaws
Prior to 2000, unincorporated areas could adopt a rural land use bylaw that was effectively a combined
official community plan and zoning bylaw for the area. The rural land use bylaw authority was discontin-
ued in 2000 but existing plans continue to be in effect and may be amended.

Advisory planning commissions
Advisory planning commissions (described in Chapter 4) are used by municipalities, regional districts,
and local trust committees of the Islands Trust to advise on such matters as land use, community
planning, zoning, permits, and subdivision bylaws. Some councils use an APC for policy advice only,
while others may involve it in the implementation of regulatory policies, such as the review of rezoning
applications. In some cases, several APCs have been created for the initial development of local area
plans, then, when the plans were approved, dissolved, and replaced by a single APC appointed for future
deliberations.
    A regional district board may appoint an APC to advise it on a rural area OCP or land use bylaw upon
the recommendation of the electoral area director who represents it. In addition to the planning advice it
gives, a rural area APC may also be used as a sounding board for the regional director regarding other
services or facilities that the regional board should consider providing.

Observations on the community planning process
While public officials and technical personnel do most of the work in creating plans in larger municipali-
ties, local residents often do much of the work in small municipalities, municipal neighbourhoods, sub-
areas of a regional district, or local trust areas. The development of community plans is an important
exercise, especially in rural areas where such planning had never occurred before it was required in 1971.
Developing a plan leads to a greater understanding of the likely future of an area and, to the extent that
there is agreement on likely future directions, expectations tend to be self-fulfilling. As developers take
the plan into account, certainty is increased and conflicts are reduced.
     Because the planning process tends to involve a variety of interest groups, the results may be mixed.
An influential group may advocate policies based on abstract notions of the way things should be rather
than what can be rationally predicted, or may seek to maintain the status quo and try to block forces for
change, rather than plan for orderly development that acknowledges the way an area fits into its larger
environment. To ignore such forces is not good planning, and the referral process provides some
protection against it. For example, if a provincial ministry or agency objects to a regional district OCP,
approval may be delayed and final approval by the minister may even be withheld.


10.5 Zoning and Related Activities
The Local Government Act provisions for zoning are contained in Part 26, “Management of Develop-
ment.” In addition to zoning, this part of the Act covers OCPs, rural land use bylaws, public hearings,
public information, land use procedure manuals, advisory planning commissions, boards of variance,
regulation of signs, farm bylaws, development permits, temporary commercial and industrial permits,
tree-cutting permits (for regional districts only), land use contracts (which are no longer used), fees,
subdivisions, and development cost charges (DCCs). Subdivisions and DCCs are discussed in the next
section.

History of zoning
Zoning was first developed in Europe in the mid-1800s. In North America, it was first used in California
in 1885 to exclude Chinese laundries from specific areas. In 1916, after the State of New York passed
legislation permitting New York City to undertake zoning, more comprehensive land use classifications
