164    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   were developed that were intended to prevent the intrusion of industrial and high-density residential uses
   into the carriage trade areas along Fifth Avenue. Zoning was introduced in Ontario in 1921 and in the
   Municipality of Point Grey in 1922. It was extended to the City of Vancouver in 1927 when Point Grey,
   South Vancouver, and Vancouver merged. The Town Planning Act (1925) allowed all B.C. municipalities
   to undertake zoning.
       Zoning started with the relatively simple idea of designating which land uses (e.g., single-family
   residential, multifamily residential, retail commercial, industrial, etc.) and at what density could occur in
   different areas of the city. Designating what uses are permitted in a zone excludes others. In the early
   years, the focus was generally on protecting single-family residential neighbourhoods from the intrusion
   of multifamily residences or commercial or industrial activities. Over the years, zoning practices have
   become more elaborate and additional types of uses have received special protection, such as agricultural
   lands and port terminal areas. In addition, with increasing desires to exercise greater control over
   developments, there has been a continuing increase in the number of detailed zoning distinctions related
   to specific sites. In many bylaws, the distinctions have become so elaborate that it is common to find 100
   or more different zoning categories In Victoria, for example, there were 121 in 1985, over 350 by 1995
   and over 600 by 2008. In addition to the rigidity introduced by the detailed specification of land uses
   permitted in so many zones, a variety of tools to introduce flexibility have also been created, some of
   which are presented below.

   Zoning bylaws
   Like OCPs, zoning bylaws are prepared by municipalities, regional districts, and trust committees of the
   Islands Trust. As indicated in Exhibit 10–3, the main provisions for zoning bylaws are contained in
   section 903 of the Local Government Act. It is possible to include zoning provisions in a single, compre-
   hensive land use bylaw that incorporates all elements of land use regulation. Provisions regarding
   parking, drainage, signs, screening, and flood plains may be incorporated in a zoning bylaw or could be in
   one or more separate bylaws. Nonconforming uses that exist at the time the bylaw is adopted are
   permitted to continue.
       An individual property owner is not entitled to compensation for a reduction in land values or other
   losses related to the adoption of an OCP or zoning bylaw, unless the property in question is restricted to a
   public use. Some hardships may be alleviated through development variance permits.

   Development variance permits
   Sometimes a relaxation of the full application of the land use regulations would be appropriate. In such
   circumstances a municipal council or regional district board may issue a development variance permit to
   vary the provisions of a land use regulation with regard to a specific property. As with a board of
   variance, the use or density of the land cannot be varied, nor can a flood plain specification. The decision
   to issue a permit is made by a resolution of the council or regional district board no less than 10 days after
   it has issued appropriate notice of the proposed variance.
        Where a local government has both a development variance permit procedure and a board of vari-
   ance, a person can apply for a variance through either process. Some governments prefer the development
   variance permit mechanism because the basis on which a local government may allow a variance is
   broader than that for a board of variance. They may also prefer to exercise more direct control over
   variance decisions than is possible through an autonomous board of variance.
