166   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



  development for a local area. To accomplish this end, zoning has to be based on accurate land use
  forecasts. The uses assigned must be economically feasible and the location and relative quantities of land
  assigned to different uses must be an accurate reflection of future market demands, because traditional
  zoning is primarily a negative tool. It can prevent development inconsistent with zoning, but it cannot get
  buildings constructed for appropriate uses. The marketplace and the individual commitments of private
  developers will determine the actual nature of development within the zones.
       Serious problems can arise when land is zoned for uneconomic uses or is not allocated in relation to
  demand. Land zoned for uneconomic uses may be left vacant or, more likely, the landowners may
  continually request rezonings from the municipal council. Lack of development on inappropriately zoned
  parcels can also lead to a lower tax base and to development moving outside the municipality, but
  continual rezoning leads to a net reduction in certainty for everyone involved. Unlike in Ontario, there is
  no appeals process for zoning decisions other than the courts, which consider process and not the
  substance of the zoning itself.
       Traditional zoning is not an easy tool to use. Local governments have not had a good history of pre-
  dicting demands for future land use and have tended to zone vacant land very restrictively, so that every
  major change requires a political decision. It has been common, for example, to zone vacant land for rural
  or very large lot single-family residential use without designating any areas for future commercial or
  industrial developments. A residential developer may put in a subdivision and promise tranquility to the
  homeowners because the land adjacent to the subdivision is zoned for rural use. What the homeowners
  may not realize is that all vacant land may be zoned for rural use and, when market forces dictate a
  demand for industrial or commercial development, the demand may result in a rezoning application on the
  property next to the subdivision. Even if the land use is appropriate, political controversy can ensue. In
  one of the few attempts to evaluate zoning in British Columbia, a 1980 review and analysis of zoning in
  the Lower Mainland and elsewhere concluded that it had not worked very well (Goldberg and Horwood
  1980). A policy of restrictive zoning followed by ad hoc changes increases rather than decreases
  uncertainty about future land use. It also presents a dilemma—how to balance the flexibility to achieve
  municipal objectives, which often include “amenity contributions” while not turning into an outright
  selling the zoning a developer wants.
       Over the years, in recognition of the problems with traditional zoning, municipalities and regional
  districts have been provided with more flexible options. These options, which have included land use
  contracts and now include density bonusing, comprehensive development zoning, development permit
  areas, design review, transfer of development rights, phased development agreements, and covenants, are
  discussed below.

   Contract zoning
  Land use contracts were used in British Columbia from 1971 to the early 1980s. In simple terms, land use
  contracts were zoning contracts for individual pieces of land and each was negotiated with a local
  government individually. They were essentially spot zoning, that is zoning lots individually rather than
  providing larger zones for specific uses. The reason given for discontinuing their use in the province was
  the same as the criticism leveled against some flexible approaches elsewhere—they gave planners too
  much authority and, as a result, local governments were simply viewed as blackmailers who extorted
  demands from developers as a condition for project approval. The Local Government Act still contains
  provisions for amending or discharging previously existing land use contracts. New zoning options are
  more limited.
