                                                            REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS               167


Density bonusing
A zoning bylaw may provide for density bonusing, whereby the zoning bylaw is written to offer
additional density if developers provide amenities such as affordable housing, special-needs housing,
public art, etc. This provision exemplifies the manner in which zoning bylaws have become elaborate
mechanisms for local governments to provide more flexibility and exert greater control over specific
developments.

Comprehensive development zoning
Establishing a special zoning category tailored to a specific development proposal for a site is sometimes
called comprehensive development zoning. All the regulations for a specific development, including use
and density, are written into a zoning category that is tailored specifically for the site. This approach is
more flexible than conventional zoning but it is also more demanding of the time of proponents and
municipal staff.

Development permit areas
The Local Government Act empowers local governments to designate development permit areas where
development within an area must meet specific design requirements for that area. Development permit
areas may be established for purposes such as protection of the natural environment, revitalization of
commercial areas, form and character of multifamily residential development, protection of development
from hazardous conditions, and since 2008, objectives to promote reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
The objectives for the permit areas and design guidelines must be clearly specified in the OCP or in a
zoning bylaw.
     Subject to certain restrictions, a development permit may vary or supplement a zoning or subdivision
bylaw, impose conditions respecting the sequence and timing of construction and, as appropriate, include
requirements, conditions, or standards regarding protection of the natural environment, landscaping,
screening, fencing, siting, building form, exterior design, machinery and equipment, and finish. The types
of physical changes that trigger a requirement for a development permit vary depending upon the purpose
for which the design control is required. For example, a development permit may or may not be required
for the removal of vegetation, depending upon the purpose of the area.
     Development permit areas are used throughout British Columbia. Development permit areas provide
landowners and developers with information about the special characteristics of the area and the
community’s aspirations. They also provide a community with an opportunity to regulate in a more
detailed manner than a conventional zoning. The City of Vancouver, whose Vancouver Charter provi-
sions are different from those of the Local Government Act, essentially treats the whole city as a
development permit area.

Design review
Many local governments establish an advisory committee to review the design of proposed developments.
The committee is typically composed of design professionals, such as architects and landscape architects.
A design review committee can be especially valuable in assessing whether a proposed development
complies with the requirements and guidelines stated in the OCP for a development permit area.

Transfer of development rights
The technique of transferring development rights involves transferring the density permitted on one
property to another property, so the permitted density on the first property is reduced while that of the
second property is increased. There is no specific legislative provision authorizing this technique. The
most common format is for a local government to process two companion rezonings together, and for it to
