168     LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   require that a covenant be registered on the land title of the donor property indicating that it is not eligible
   for a return to higher density of development. This is a sophisticated approach that requires a great deal of
   political self-discipline. The Salt Spring Island OCP includes formal provisions for transferring develop-
   ment rights to discourage sprawl and encourage clustering of residential uses.

   Phased development agreements
   A phased development agreement is an agreement between a developer and the local government that has
   the effect of freezing subsequent changes to zoning bylaws and specified development permits for the
   term of the agreement, unless the developer agrees. A PDA can cover items such as the inclusion of
   certain features or amenities in the development, and the timing of the development.
       Under a PDA, a local government is empowered to assure that the zoning for a large project will stay
   the same over the long term. In exchange, the local government may be able to negotiate greater benefits
   for the community. Provisions for PDAs were introduced in 2007 to address some of the concerns
   surrounding amenity zoning in British Columbia and to help increase certainty for the development
   industry that there would be no changes when, for example, the makeup and direction of councils may
   change from one election to another.

   Covenants
  A land use covenant is legal contract that runs with the land and is used to restrict or control development
  on a parcel of land. Covenants can be used for “building schemes,” for some other subdivision matters,
  and for the protection of natural areas and heritage resources. The types of covenants used in B.C. include
  agreements among private property owners, and, under section 219 of the Land Title Act, agreements
  involving private property owners and governments and non-governmental conservation organizations.


   10.6 Subdivision Control
  Subdivision, which involves the creation of new lots by subdividing larger ones, is a major activity in
  economic development and urban growth. Because it involves transactions in real property it is governed
  by the Land Title Act and the Strata Property Act, as well as the Local Government Act. The subdivision
  of land must meet requirements provided for in the zoning bylaws and other regulations which may or
  may not be combined into a single bylaw.
      Subdivision servicing regulations can accomplish several objectives. They can ensure that new lots
  are appropriate for the intended use, that public services are installed at standards comparable to those in
  the rest of the area, that improvements are paid for by the developer as part of the development process
  rather than by the general taxpayers, and that ongoing servicing costs will be reasonable. When new
  developments must pay their own way, more efficient land use decisions are made because subdivisions
  will not be undertaken until there is sufficient market demand to pay the cost of transforming land for a
  new use.

   Strata subdivision
  The enabling legislation for land use regulation defines a subdivision as including both bare land and
  condominium building subdivision under the Strata Property Act. Bare land stratas 30 must be approved by
  the approving officer before they can be registered on land titles. Building stratas are not administered
  through this process.


   30
       Bare land stratas are subdivisions within a condominium regime where roads and infrastructure are owned by the strata corporation, which
  is made up of the owners within the development. The corporation is likely to have much stricter rules than a municipal government.
