                                                             REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS              169


    Land use regulations, including minimum lot size, cannot be used to prevent condominium buildings
from being built in multifamily zones. However, boards and councils do have effective veto-power over
any conversion of existing rental buildings to strata ownership.
    Subdivision of land as a bare land strata is a special situation. The legislation provides flexibility for
the approving officer to use site size averaging to allow clustering of the development and the preserva-
tion of greenspace under common ownership. Because the internal roads and services will not come into
public ownership the subdivision servicing standards bylaw does not apply to bare land stratas.

Subdivision approval process
An approving officer’s signature on a final application is required before the provincial Land Titles Office
will recognize a subdivision by registering the new plan and the deeds for the new parcels. The Land Title
Act requires that each municipality designate an approving officer for subdivisions. Normally this is an
employee, such as the chief planner, engineer, or another individual who has been given the role of an
approving officer. The role of subdivision approving officer is primarily technical and administrative but
it requires legal expertise as well as technical knowledge and judgement, and smaller municipalities may
have to obtain services from a consultant. Although the approving officer is a local government em-
ployee, when exercising the approving officer functions the officer does not take direction from the
council or elected representatives except through their enacted bylaws.
     For unincorporated areas the approving officer is an employee of the ministry responsible for trans-
portation. The ministry assumed this role long before the creation of regional districts in 1965–67 because
of its responsibility for monitoring and controlling access to all land in the province, including highway
access to subdivisions and adjacent lands through subdivided parcels, so that pockets of inaccessible land
did not remain. In 1997 the provincial legislation (Land Title Act, s. 77.1) was amended to enable this
authority to be delegated to regional districts that request the authority, but as of 2008 no such delegations
have been approved.

Development cost charges, school, and park dedications
To supplement subdivision controls, local governments may impose development cost charges (DCCs) on
every person who either obtains approval of a subdivision or obtains a building permit. DCCs contribute
to the capital cost of the local infrastructure required to serve the development, including roads, sewers,
water systems, drainage services, and park acquisition and development. DCC revenues must be placed in
separate reserve funds to be used for future capital works or to help pay off debts incurred in the past for
the provision of infrastructure. Considerable discretion is permitted local governments in the development
of DCC schedules but a DCC bylaw must reflect actual costs that the local government has incurred or
expects to incur, and it must be approved by the inspector of municipalities.
    Subdivision permission, primarily for larger subdivisions, also requires that land be donated to the
government for schools and parks. Under some provisions, cash can be paid instead.

Replotting schemes
Sometimes when development occurred long ago the actual construction of buildings did not conform to
the correct parcel boundaries, with the result that several buildings encroach upon their neighbours’
property. When a major project like a new freeway is undertaken, it can be expected that there will be
situations in which existing patterns of land subdivision will be disturbed. To address this kind of
situation, the Local Government Act enables municipalities to initiate replotting and reallotment of parcels
to the landowners in the district, with compensation paid to owners who are adversely affected by the
replotting scheme. To initiate such a replotting, a municipality must first publish a notice of it in a
newspaper and must then have the consent of owners whose lands constitute at least 70 percent of the
