170    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   assessed value of all land in the district. To deal with complaints, the municipality must ask the Supreme
   Court to appoint a commissioner to hold a public hearing. Ultimately, the replotted parcels are registered
   in the land title system. This is a specialized tool that is rarely used.


   10.7 General Bylaw Enforcement
  Local government bylaw enforcement generally refers to a host of actions directed at obtaining compli-
  ance with local government bylaws. This may include educating the public about regulatory rules,
  conducting inspections to ensure that the rules are being followed, mediating between members of the
  public, leveraging voluntary compliance with the rules where possible, and administering consequences
  for contraventions where compliance is not forthcoming or harm has been done to the community.
       Key local government bylaw enforcement authority is found in the Community Charter, which pro-
  vides the core municipal powers. Certain provisions of the Community Charter, particularly relating to
  municipal ticketing, also apply to regional districts and local trust committees. Other bylaw enforcement
  authorities for regional districts are found in the Local Government Act, and for local trust committees in
  the Islands Trust Act. Other local government bodies may have specific bylaw enforcement powers in
  their acts, for example, in the Vancouver Charter for the City of Vancouver.
       “Self-help” enforcement powers allow local governments to undertake inspections by entering onto
  property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to determine if bylaw requirements are being
  met. In relation to certain hazardous situations or declared nuisances, a municipal council may order a
  person to rectify the situation or take action to eliminate the hazard. Where bylaw compliance is a
  condition of a permission, such as a business licence, a municipality could suspend the licence pending
  compliance. If a person does not take required actions in relation to property, the local government may
  take the action and recover the cost of it through property taxes.
       If efforts to obtain compliance fail, a local government can take legal steps for enforcement in a num-
  ber of ways. Since 2003, for simple matters, such as parking violations, local governments can implement
  an administrative penalty system known as bylaw notice enforcement under the Local Government Bylaw
  Notice Enforcement Act. If it chooses this system, a local government is required to establish a dispute
  process that is much less formal than a court and is presided over by a third party. As of 2008, 13 local
  governments had implemented this system. A local government can also choose to seek a summary
  conviction for the contravention of a bylaw in Provincial Court, through the abbreviated municipal
  ticketing process under the Community Charter. A municipal ticket is completed by a police or bylaw
  enforcement officer, and may be immediately personally served on the alleged offender. A municipal
  ticket may be resolved without court appearance through payment of a fine and admission of guilt, or may
  be disputed in court. A paid municipal ticket is typically not drawn up as a conviction. Since the
  Community Charter, there are few exceptions to the type of bylaw infraction that may be ticketed.
  Finally, a local government may seek a summary conviction for the contravention of a bylaw in Provin-
  cial Court through the longer process under the Offence Act involving appearance in court. This process is
  for the most serious bylaw infractions, with the formality of the process matching the potential serious-
  ness of the consequences, such as a fine of up to $10,000 and imprisonment.
       A local government can also use civil remedies to enforce or prevent or restrain the contravention of a
  bylaw, such as applying to the Supreme Court for an injunction or court order.
       Most bylaws require enforcement by individuals with specialized training, knowledge, or experience.
  Elements of bylaw enforcement are carried out primarily by employees and officers of a local government
  who are appointed by name or job classification as bylaw enforcement officers, although not all local
  governments employ such staff. Traffic and possibly some other regulations are enforced by the police.
  Some bylaws may be enforced by contracted personnel for parking or for animal control. For many
