                                                              REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS             171


regulations there is no active enforcement mechanism and officials act only when complaints are
received.


10.8 Performance Measures and Fiscal Equivalence
Evaluating the performance of the entire system of land use planning and regulation is difficult and is
seldom attempted. Historically one might look at measures such as how often rezoning was undertaken to
satisfy a particular proposal, which would be a negative measure in a well-zoned system, but this would
be meaningless within governments that use more flexible zoning and land use tools regularly. There may
be measures that can be used to look at specific outcomes, such as whether annual measures of automo-
bile congestion are increasing or decreasing, or whether the amount of affordable housing is increasing or
decreasing, but these broader measures cannot be associated with any single policy or program. Scholars
and policymakers have a long way to go to develop performance measures for the land use planning and
regulatory system.
     The fact that it is difficult if not impossible to associate specific planning or regulatory decisions with
specific outcomes makes achieving fiscal equivalence in planning and regulatory decisions equally
difficult. While the direct costs for land use regulations to both the governments and developers can be
identified and it is common for fees to cover a major portion of the costs, other costs that can be
compared with the benefits of land use regulations are the long-term impacts on land and housing
markets.
     When land use regulations and the installation of infrastructure (roads, water, sewers, etc.) increases
the supply of buildable land, the increased supply may contribute to keeping its price down for developers
and result in lower housing costs for homeowners. However, when the regulatory processes lengthen the
time it takes to make land available, get approvals for construction, or actually restricts the supply of land,
the supply of housing may be restricted and costs and prices can rise significantly. The consequences for
price increases due to regulation are very different for differently situated families.
     Those families who already own homes can benefit significantly from regulation-driven cost in-
creases as their homes become more valuable. They are also the local voters who dominate local hearings
and local elections. Newcomers to the community will find housing prices to be very high, as will low-
income families and individuals. Furthermore, if housing prices rise faster than incomes, an increasing
proportion of residents will not be able to afford to become homeowners in that community. It is difficult
to sort out the influences on housing markets and thus difficult to identify which government activities
exert the strongest influence on housing prices, but the consequences can be very important.
     Scholars in the United States tried to work out these consequences since cities in California began
purposively restricting development in the 1960s. A recent study of the Seattle metropolitan area by the
University of Washington’s Economic Policy Research Center, which uses methodology developed at
Harvard and the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, concludes that land use restrictions
and regulations in the Seattle area add approximately $200,000 to the price of a $450,000 residence. The
study does not conclude that this is either good or bad. It simply points out that it is costing $1,147 each
month for the benefits for a family living within the regulatory system of the Seattle metropolitan area. It
is difficult to take into account and balance the benefits and costs of the land use regulatory decisions by
local governments throughout a metropolitan area, but that does not mean that real benefits and costs do
not result from their decisions.
     We are unaware of any similar studies in Canada, but land use regulations, including restrictions such
as agricultural land reserve designation, do affect land availability and the time it takes for new develop-
ments. One should anticipate that the regulatory framework does increase housing prices and take that
into account when designing these and other policies on housing.
