172    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



      Land use planning and regulatory decisions are shaped by provincial legislation, the Local Govern-
  ment Act, Community Charter, and other provincial legislation like the Land Title Act. Both the policy
  and regulatory decisions made by local government are relatively inexpensive compared to both the costs
  and benefits that accrue to citizens. In addition, citizens may have multiple and sometimes conflicting
  roles, such as citizens as homeowners liking higher housing values, but citizens as home purchasers
  preferring lower prices. There is no way to avoid these issues and problems, but they are very real ones.


   10.9 Summary Observations
   Planning, zoning, and subdivision control are undertaken by all municipalities and regional districts in
   British Columbia. While the legislation provides for comprehensive regulation it is not without problems.
   One problem is that the zoning process itself can lead to increased uncertainty regarding future land use in
   situations where OCP amendments and zoning changes are routinely made, each on the basis of an ad hoc
   political decision. This problem has been a serious one in some jurisdictions.
       The second problem concerns the increasing complexity of regulations. For example, anyone propos-
   ing a subdivision or land use change must be sure the proposal meets community plan requirements.
   Next, the developer must meet all the zoning and subdivision requirements in the Local Government Act,
   Land Title Act and local bylaws, and must obtain any necessary approvals from one or more of the
   ministries responsible for transportation, highways, environment, Crown lands, forests, and agriculture.
   Each set of requirements that must be met is part of a substantial body of regulations, only a few of which
   will apply to the project. If any change in regulations is required, such as a rezoning or a variance,
   additional time must be allowed. Finally, several of the acts and the local regulations may cover precisely
   the same issues and the most restrictive one in any given case likely applies.
       The net result is sufficiently complex that, for problems of any magnitude, developers who would
   normally process their own applications must turn to land surveyors, planning consultants, and/or lawyers
   for assistance, and even these specialists are not always conversant with the provincial or local bylaws
   applicable to specific situations. That the system functions at all is due to the efforts of people like the
   subdivision approving officers who are the focal point for coordinating all the different requirements
   before an approved plan can be forwarded to the land titles office for registration. It must be emphasized
   that criticisms of the complexity of overlapping regulations are not criticisms of the substance of the
   regulatory process. The roles of provincial ministries, regional districts, municipalities, and local groups
   involved in settlement and community planning are legitimate and essential to the effective regulation of
   land use.
       Finally, given the complexity and magnitude of outcomes that cannot be associated with any specific
   policy, plan, or regulation, evaluating these processes is extremely difficult.
