                                                                                     LABOUR RELATIONS         173




 Chapter Eleven
Labour Relations


W
            hile unionization and collective bargaining for employees of the governments of Canada and
            British Columbia fall under special legislation, local government labour relations come under
            the same labour legislation as the private sector. Because they have major implications for the
efficiency and responsiveness of local government service delivery, it is useful to examine the framework
within which labour relations occur.


11.1 Policy Framework
A number of acts shape labour relations in the local government environment. Municipalities and regional
districts can employ people, appoint people as officers of the local government, enter into agreements,
and establish terms and conditions of employment by virtue of the powers they are granted as corpora-
tions. The Community Charter and the Local Government Act also set out specific powers and rules,
especially in relation to local government officers—for example, the authority of the mayor to suspend an
officer, subject to confirmation by council, and the requirement that termination of an officer without
cause be decided by a two-thirds vote of all council members. However, the terms and conditions of
employment and the processes that govern labour relations for local governments are determined by the
key labour statutes—namely, the Employment Standards Act and the Labour Relations Code.
     The Employment Standards Act ensures there are basic standards of compensation and conditions of
employment that promote the fair treatment of employees and employers and provide fair and efficient
procedures for resolving disputes. Where a contract of employment with non-unionized employees or
officers or where a collective agreement between a union and a local government contains provisions
relating to matters covered by the Employment Standards Act, the contract or collective agreement will
apply. Where the contract or collective agreement is silent, the applicable provisions of the Employment
Standards Act are deemed to be a part of the contract or collective agreement.
     The relationships between local governments and their unionized employees are governed primarily
by the Labour Relations Code. The Code includes rules for the formation and certification of unions,
collective bargaining in good faith, collective agreement enforcement, settlement of disputes, strikes,
lockouts, picketing, and the designation of essential services. Employers cannot interfere either positively
or negatively with union organization processes. No strikes or lockouts can take place when a collective
agreement is in force. Mid-contract disputes must be resolved by joint consultation, mediation, or
arbitration. Strikes require authorization votes by the union membership and neither strikes nor lockouts
can take place without proper notice. If the minister considers that a dispute “poses a threat to the health,
safety, or welfare” of British Columbians, the “facilities, productions, and services” can be designated as
essential services. Since 1996, a number of minor housekeeping changes have been made to the Code. For
example, it has been amended to make the statute easier to read by reorganizing its layout.
     The Labour Relations Code is administered by the Labour Relations Board, which consists of a chair,
vice-chairs, and part-time members who represent employers and employees. The number of vice-chairs
and part-time members fluctuate over time and are appointed by the cabinet. Members sit on adjudicative
panels led by board vice-chairs to deal with such matters as applications for union certification or
