                                                                                                  FINANCE         179




 Chapter Twelve
Finance


T
        he preceding chapters have discussed local government functions and activities, the magnitude of
        the expenditures on them, and budgeting procedures in municipalities and regional districts. This
        chapter examines the rationale for different revenue sources, accounting requirements, ways
expenditures are financed, and the magnitude of the different revenue sources. There is also a discussion
of approaches to evaluating financing alternatives and the relationship between financing and the decision
to provide services.


12.1 Local Government Revenue Principles
While revenues and revenue raising are sometimes discussed separately from the basic decision-making
processes of local governments, revenue raising and expenditure decision making are intimately related.
An important criteria for a decentralized system of local governance is that when decisions are made to
provide benefits, they need to be balanced against the costs of those benefits. This is best done by elected
officials, a municipal council, or regional district board that represents the citizens who will benefit and
who will also have to raise taxes or impose service charges on the benefiting citizens to pay for their
benefits. This principle is called “fiscal equivalence.” This does not mean that groups cannot make
separate decisions within themselves to adjust tax burdens in different ways and there are always some
people who would prefer their benefits be paid for by someone else. However, only if some reasonable
balance between benefits and costs can be maintained in individual and local government decision
making can fair and efficient long-run results be expected. This concept has some dimensions that are
useful to identify.

Direct benefits to individuals
Many governmental activities result in direct benefits to identifiable individuals who may choose whether
or not to use a good or service. According to the principle of fiscal equivalence, benefits such as parking
spaces, tennis courts, ball fields, or special searches for documents should be paid for by users. People
will use more or less of a service depending on its price and the availability of substitutes. Only by
charging a price equal to the cost can one be sure that the value placed on the service is at least as great as
the cost of providing it. B.C. local governments levy a lot of service charges consistent with this
requirement.

Benefits to groups
Local governments separate provincial citizens into spatially defined groups. Some municipalities provide
a broad range of services for their citizens. Improvement districts, school districts, and regional district
service areas provide a single or very few services to their members. Where the benefits accrue primarily
within the boundaries of the group, it is appropriate that the group raise the funds to pay for them. The
British Columbia local government system, especially its regional districts, is organized on this principle.
Where there are significant spillovers of benefits to citizens outside the boundaries of the group, the
criteria of fiscal equivalence would be better met if some part of the cost was borne by a larger govern-
