180    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   ment that included all of the beneficiaries. This includes provincial government transfers to smaller
   governments where there is a provincial interest involved, and also the assumption, by the provincial
   government, of almost all of the services that directly involve income redistribution (e.g., welfare).

   Temporal fiscal equivalence
   Temporal fiscal equivalence is the matching of payments to the time when benefits are received. This
   means paying for current programs from current taxes but paying for the construction of a long-term
   facility through borrowing which will be paid back over time by the users of the facility. These two
   aspects of fiscal equivalence appear to be achieved to a very high degree in British Columbia because the
   provincial government supervises local government debt quite strictly.
        The other way to pay for a facility over time is through contributions to a reserve fund. In this case,
   temporal fiscal equivalence is not achieved because the time when the payment is made does not match
   the time when the benefit is received.
        There can be problems with achieving or maintaining temporal fiscal equivalence. For example, once
   physical facilities such as streets, sidewalks, watermains, and sewers are in place, maintenance by the
   current beneficiaries may be neglected. Such neglect reduces the need to raise revenues in the short run
   but much more expensive reconstruction may be required in the long run. Achieving a balance between
   costs and benefits would require that beneficiaries pay for maintaining the facilities they inherit—a policy
   that would provide net benefits for all over time. However, raising funds for the upkeep of existing
   facilities appears to be something elected officials are often willing to put off. As a result, the deteriora-
   tion of facilities can become a serious problem.

   Tax equity
  While the criterion of fiscal equivalence applies to governments in relation to other governments and to
  service charges for individual benefits, tax equity applies to individual taxpayers within a government.
  Several criteria that are important. One criterion is benefits received. That is, taxes should bear some
  relationship to the benefits received by the taxpayer. A second is horizontal equity, which means equally
  situated taxpayers should pay the same taxes. Two other closely related criteria are vertical equity and
  ability to pay. With vertical equity, taxpayers who are unequally situated should pay different taxes, and
  ability to pay makes it clear that taxpayers with higher income or assets (depending on the tax base)
  should pay more than those with less. Another concept with regard to property taxes is that an old tax is a
  good tax. Property purchases are usually long-term decisions, so knowing what taxes and benefits are
  associated with the property allows the purchaser to make better decisions. The criteria of fiscal equiva-
  lence and tax equity are used to understand the effects of using the different revenue sources.


   12.2 Budgeting and Financial Reporting
   Budgeting and financial reporting in local governments are two vital functions at opposite sides of the
   same issue. Budgeting looks forward and estimates costs and revenues for the future, while financial
   reporting looks back at the past and quantifies what results were achieved.

   Budgeting
  The budget process in local government is one in which policy becomes reality. Estimates of the costs of
  programs and projects are put into a timetable, and revenue sources put in place to fund them. In this way
  all the financial needs of a local government are collected with estimated revenues into one document
  called the budget or financial plan.
