182       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



          •   Statutory reports required by specific agencies, such as CRA, Statistics Canada, and the provin-
              cial government. For municipalities the municipal affairs ministry requires a specific report
              (LGDE) on which it collects data which is distributed to other provincial agencies.
      In the past, local governments in B.C. accounted for and reported on their revenues and expenditures
      through a variety of self-contained funds, each established for a defined purpose. This simplistic “cash-in,
      cash-out” system worked well for many years, particularly in small entities with a limited number of
      funds, where the stakeholders involved understood the limitations of each fund.
          Reporting by fund did not give a clear picture of the whole entity’s financial condition. PSAB was
      formed with this vision: “That the public understands and has confidence in public-sector reporting.”
      They issue standards and guidance with respect to matters of accounting in the public sector.
          Under PSAB, local governments must:
          1. Consolidate all activities of the government entity into their financial statements. For instance, if
              they control a library, it must be shown as part of the local government’s statements.
          2. Show actual results compared to budget.
          3. Show their financials assets and financial liabilities separately so as to calculate their net debt or
              net financial asset position.
          4. Report liabilities such as post-employment benefits and landfill reclamation costs.
          5. As of 2009, local governments must show their tangible capital assets on their balance sheets at
              cost less accumulated depreciation in the same way as the private sector and other levels of
              governments.
      The results give a clearer picture of the total financial position of a local government in a format that is
      the same for all governments, so that results can be compared across different entities. Annual financial
      statements must be audited. B.C. legislation requires that each local government have an auditor who is
      qualified under section 180 of the Company Act.
           However, PSAB only relates to annual external reporting. Many stakeholders need more detailed
      information, more frequent reporting, or for the same numbers to be reported in a different way. Local
      governments must issue periodic budget variance reports, reports on individual entities, capital project
      reports, and reports on reserves to satisfy the needs of their internal users, who must monitor progress
      being made throughout the year.
           Regional districts have more complex fund structures than municipalities in order to allocate revenues
      and expenditures to their many service areas. For example, before being split, the Regional District of
      Comox-Strathcona had separate funds within its general, water, and sewer funds for more than 125
      distinct functions in 2004. While these are consolidated in the audited financial statements, many external
      users are interested in the financial results of each function, so most regional districts ensure that the
      numbers for each fund are reported separately in their annual statements.
           All local governments must issue statutory reports under provincial and federal legislation as well as
      reports to granting and lending agencies. Most modern computer systems can easily accommodate codes
      for different entities, funds, functions, objects, and departments. These can be adapted to report on the
      same basic numbers in a format that will meet the different reporting requirements of many stakeholders.


   12.3 Revenue Sources
   Local governments in British Columbia, like those in most of the western world, finance their activities
   with revenues from property taxes (including grants in lieu of taxes), service charges and special
   assessments, transfers from other governments, and various other of their own sources, including
   developer contributions, licence fees, fines, earnings on reserve funds, and sale of assets. However, as
