                                                                                               FINANCE     183


indicated in Exhibit 12–1, the relative reliance on the various sources varies considerably among the
different local governments.
    Four kinds of government—municipalities, regional districts, school districts, and TransLink—
collectively account for over 98 percent of all local government operating revenues and expenditures in
British Columbia. Exhibit 12–1 shows that these governments received and spent over $13.2 billion in
2006, an amount equal to a little over $3,000 for each person in the province or slightly over $9,000 for a
family of three. Municipalities and school districts accounted for 83 percent of the total.
    The distribution of revenue was as follows:
    • Municipalities raised over $5.9 billion, 45 percent of the overall total or $1,626 per municipal
         citizen. About 48 percent of this came from property and other taxes, 32 percent from sale of
         services, 12 percent from other own source, and 7 percent from government transfers.
    • Regional districts raised $1.2 billion, 9 percent of the total or $278 per regional district citizen.
         Thirty-two percent came from electoral area property taxes and municipal requisitions, 48 percent
         from sale of services, 9 percent from other own source, and nearly 11 percent from other govern-
         ments.
    • Nearly $5 billion was raised for school districts, 38 percent of the total or $1,151 per provincial
         citizen. More than 90 percent came from provincial and other government transfers. No property
         taxes are levied by school districts, but the provincial government does levy a school property tax
         which raises revenue equal to approximately 33 percent of school district expenditures. Those
         revenues go into the provincial general fund and schools are financed on a formula basis. School
         district own-source revenues include summer school charges, international student fees, rents, and
         transfers directly from First Nations to school districts where the First Nation has assumed re-
         sponsibility for education or wants special programs in the schools.
    • TransLink raised over $1.1 billion, about 9 percent of the overall total or $527 per Greater Van-
         couver citizen. Fuel tax was the largest source, and together with property taxes, accounted for
         over 47 percent of total revenue. More than 26 percent came from transit fares. Twenty-two per-
         cent of the government transfers was from municipalities for capital projects benefiting the
         municipality that were being managed by TransLink.
The revenue patterns for British Columbia’s general local governments are similar to local governments
across North America. The property tax and sale of services are the most important sources for general
local governments, including municipalities, regional districts, and, elsewhere, counties. While a greater
proportion of education funding is being provided by provincial or state governments, British Columbia is
one of the jurisdictions in which the tax-setting function of local boards of education on even a small part
of the total cost has been replaced by provincial transfers, even though the districts possess a residual
taxation authority, subject to a popular referendum, that none have used. The almost total reliance on
provincial transfers reflects the fact that the provincial government assumed direct control over the
collection of nonresidential school taxes in 1982 and residential school taxes in 1990. In the process, the
general power of school districts to set their own rates and collect their own property taxes was effec-
tively abrogated and the percentage of school district revenues attributable to property taxes declined
from around 40 percent in 1980–93 to 33 percent in 2006. This shift has helped provide tax room for
other local governments that levy property taxes and helped keep residential property taxes in British
Columbia around one percent of property value, which is toward the low end of residential property tax
rates across North America. Provincial control of education spending also appears to contribute to
education costs being lower relative to total spending by municipalities than prior to the takeover.
