                                                                                                 FINANCE       185


Municipal revenues
As indicated in Exhibits 12–1 and 12–2, municipalities have a diversified revenue base. Overall, nearly 93
percent of their 2006 revenues came from their own sources, including:
    • 47.9 percent from local property and other taxes, including grants in lieu of taxes but not includ-
        ing taxes collected for other bodies, such as regional districts;
    • 32.1 percent from sales of services (water, sewer, solid waste, transportation, recreation, etc.),
        rentals, franchise fees, licences, permits, fines, and other service charges;
    • 6.15 percent from development cost charges; and
    • 7.9 percent from the disposition of financial and physical assets, investment income, actuarial
        adjustments (reduction to the principal) on long-term debt, insurance proceeds, income of gov-
        ernment business enterprises, and miscellaneous other sources.
The remaining 7.45 percent of the revenue were conditional or unconditional grants, entitlements, and
cost-sharing transfers from other governments, including 5.7 percent from the provincial government, 0.7
percent from the federal government, and 1.1 percent from other governments (regional districts, school
districts, First Nations, improvement districts, some non-public authorities such as the Federation of
Canadian Municipalities). Smaller municipalities were more reliant on transfers from other governments,
especially provincial grants.

Regional district revenues
The sources of regional district funds are similar to those of municipalities, as indicated in Exhibits 12–1
and 12–3, but there are notable differences between the Greater Vancouver Regional District (GVRD),
which accounts for over half of the provincial population, and the other incorporated regional districts.
Nearly 90 percent of all regional district revenue is from their own sources but, for all but the GVRD,
property taxes are the major revenue source. For the GVRD, sale of services is the major revenue source.
    • 32 percent (7 percent GVRD, 53 percent other) from property taxes, parcel taxes, and grants in
        lieu of taxes
    • 48 percent (72 percent GVRD, 28 percent other) from sales of services, rentals, franchise fees,
        licences, permits, fines, and other service charges
    • 9 percent (10 percent GVRD, 10 percent other) from developer cost charges, disposition of finan-
        cial and physical assets, investment income, actuarial adjustments on long-term debt, insurance
        proceeds, government business enterprise income, and miscellaneous other sources
The remaining 10 percent of the revenue (11 percent GVRD, 10 percent other) was conditional or
unconditional grants, entitlements, and cost-sharing transfers from other governments.
     Regional districts do not collect their own property value taxes but rely on municipal tax collectors
and the provincial surveyor of taxes to collect regional district taxes within their respective jurisdictions.
The regional district submits requisitions to the province for services to citizens in electoral areas and to
each municipal government in the regional district for services to municipal citizens. Tax collectors must
indicate how much has been levied to pay the requisitions so citizens are aware of the cost of the regional
district.


12.4 Property Taxes
Directly or indirectly, property taxes are an important source of revenue for local governments. Property
value taxes are annual levies generally based on the assessed value of land and buildings. Tax rates are
typically expressed in dollars per $1,000 of the total value. Thus, a tax rate of $10 would be $10 per
$1,000 of assessed value, or one percent of the value of the property.
