188       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   Rationale
   Property taxes have three main advantages for local governments. First, they can be easily used by very
   small jurisdictions with overlapping or different boundaries, including the service areas within regional
   districts. Each jurisdiction indicates the tax rate in different areas to the tax collector who in turn adds
   them to the annual tax bill of property owners within the jurisdiction. The revenues are then collected and
   passed on by the tax collector.
        A second advantage is that real estate is immobile. This facilitates the use of the tax by small jurisdic-
   tions because property cannot get up and leave if a tax is levied on it. However, in the long run, unless the
   property owners’ tax costs are offset by government benefits or lower land prices, there may be less new
   construction. A jurisdiction whose taxes are high relative to the benefits it provides or in relation to other
   jurisdictions providing similar benefits will experience less new growth than one with lower costs.
        Third, the property tax is a benefits-received type of tax to the extent that the benefits of government
   expenditures financed by property taxes accrue to residents and property owners in the jurisdiction. The
   depressing effects of the tax on property values are offset by the enhancing effects of the benefits. The
   enhancing effects are obvious when revenues are spent for police protection, fire protection, street paving
   and streetlights, but they also occur with services such as sewers, parks, and even education. To achieve
   these benefits, property tax assessments must be consistently accurate and up to date. The actual uses of
   property taxes in British Columbia are described below.

   Property assessment procedures
   In British Columbia, BC Assessment (BCAA), a provincial Crown corporation, assesses all property in
   the province. As shown in Exhibit 12–4, property in B.C. is divided into nine basic classifications for
   assessment purposes.
       In general, the assessed value of a property in B.C. reflects the estimated market value of the land and
   improvements on it. There are three main approaches to determining the market value:
       • A direct comparison approach, in which the market value is determined by comparing the prices
            at which comparable properties have been sold, is the primary method used in assessing the value
            of residential properties wherever annual sales volumes permit reasonably valid, accurate com-
            parisons.
       • An income approach, in which the market value of a property that is rented or leased, such as an
            apartment or a commercial space, is determined by calculating the total investment that would be
            needed to earn the rental or lease income under current market rates of interest.
       • A cost approach, in which the market value is determined by estimating the site value (land and
            improvements) and the cost of replacing the existing building, then deducting the value of all
            sources of depreciation, including physical deterioration, functional obsolescence and economic
            obsolescence. This approach is used where there are no comparable sales or rental income, or
            where the improvements are unique or specialized, such as for a large industrial plant.
      To stabilize municipal tax bases that had experienced extreme cyclical variations when more traditional
      market approaches were used in assessing major industrial properties, the Assessment Act and regulations
      include special provisions for assessing major industry (class 4) and farm (class 9) property.
          Another approach is used to assess linear utility (class 2) properties, for which the taxable value is
      normally determined using rates prescribed by the BC Assessment Authority. This is not an approach to
      estimating market value but rather, a substitute for such an estimate. In place of the BC Assessment
      Authority rates, which are not to be confused with tax rates, the Local Government Act requires munici-
      palities to base certain utility company property taxes on gross annual sales and rental revenues, as
      described below.
