                                                                                                                                      FINANCE          189



EXHIBIT 12–4:              BRITISH COLUMBIA PROPERTY CLASSIFICATIONS

1. Residential: single-family residences, multifamily residences, duplexes, apartments, condominiums, nursing
   homes, seasonal dwellings, manufactured homes, recreational property, some vacant land, farm buildings, day
   care facilities.
2. Utilities: structures and land, excluding offices and sales outlets, used for railways, pipelines, telecommunica-
   tions transmission, electrical generation, and transmission.
3. Supportive Housing: includes only eligible, designated supportive housing properties.
4. Major Industry: land and improvements (buildings) of major industrial properties, such as lumber and pulp mills,
   mines, smelters, large manufacturers of specified products, ship building, and loading terminals for sea-going
   ships.
5. Light Industry: property used or held for extracting, manufacturing, or transporting products, including ancillary
   storage, scrap metal yards, wineries, and boat-building operations, excluding properties used for food and non-
   alcoholic beverage production.
6. Business Other: offices, retail, warehousing, hotels, motels, properties that do not fall into other classes.
7. Managed Forest Land: privately owned forest land managed in compliance with the Private Managed Forest
   Land Act.
8. Recreational Property Nonprofit Organization: land used solely for such outdoor recreational activities as golf,
   skiing, tennis, public swimming pools, waterslides, amusement parks, marinas, and hang gliding (but excluding
   improvements such as a clubhouse); and property used for at least 150 days per year as a place of public
   worship or as a meeting hall by a nonprofit, fraternal organization.
9. Farm Land: farm land that must produce a prescribed amount of qualifying primary agricultural products for sale,
   such as crops or livestock.




Every year, on or before December 31, the BCAA mails the owner of each property a notice of its
assessed value and prepares an assessment roll or report for each taxing jurisdiction. The roll or report
lists all properties within the jurisdiction, including those exempted from taxation.
     People may appeal the assessment of their properties to a local property assessment review panel
appointed by the minister, as long as the notice of complaint is filed by January 31. The review panel
must render its decision by April 7. If either the appellant or the assessor is dissatisfied with the panel’s
ruling, an appeal can be made in specified instances to the provincial Property Assessment Appeal Board,
provided that a notice of appeal must be filed by April 30.
     Properties in an improvement district that directly levies its own taxes are also assessed by an officer
of the improvement district, who notifies all owners and prepares an improvement district assessment roll.
Complaints can be made to a court of revision appointed by the improvement district trustees and that
body’s decisions can be appealed to the inspector of municipalities.

Property tax rates
The bodies that can tax property in B.C. include the province, municipalities, the Sechelt Indian Govern-
ment District, regional districts, the Islands Trust, improvement districts, regional hospital districts,
TransLink, BC Transit, the Municipal Finance Authority (MFA), the BCAA and, where it has satisfied a
referendum requirement, a school district.33 Each body determines how much revenue it needs to recover
through property taxes. First Nations may also levy property taxes on reserve lands.

33
     Some jurisdictions, like municipalities, levy property taxes directly. Others, like regional districts, do not directly levy taxes but
“requisition” revenue at specified tax rates to be collected by either the municipal tax collector or surveyor of taxes. The rate setting is similar and
consequences the same for taxpayers.
