190    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



        The province levies a tax on rural properties at uniform province-wide rates (except for special provi-
   sions in Peace River) for each class to fund road maintenance, rural subdivision approval, and snow
   removal for public secondary roads. The province levies school taxes throughout the province at uniform
   rates for each class of nonresidential property but rates for residential properties vary among the school
   districts, based on a formula that takes into account variations in residential assessments across the
   province. The province also levies a property tax on unincorporated areas and in municipalities under
   5,000 population for provincial policing provided to those areas.
        Municipalities, regional districts, and the other taxing jurisdictions set their rates to generate the tax
   revenue needed to cover costs not covered by other revenue sources. The variable tax rates set by regional
   districts, improvement districts, regional hospital districts, BC Transit, and the MFA must be based on
   “class multiples,” ratios for each class of property set by the ministry responsible for municipal affairs or
   set out in separate legislation or service establishment bylaw. For example, if the rate for business
   properties were required to be 2.5 times the residential property rate, and if the residential rate were set at
   $5 per $1,000 of assessed value, the business rate would have to be $12.50. In municipalities, the tax rate
   ratios are independently determined, subject to any restrictions in the governing legislation. The tax rates
   set by BC Assessment and MFA are generally uniform for each class throughout the province, while the
   rates set by the other taxing jurisdictions must be uniform within the relevant service area.
        Municipalities use two approaches to determine tax rates. One approach sets the rate for each class of
   property as a multiple of the residential rate, calculates a multiplied assessed value for all nine classes,
   then calculates the actual rate for each class required to generate the needed revenues, based on the preset
   multiples. The other approach decides the proportion of the needed funds to be provided by each class of
   property, then calculates the rate for each class by dividing the total amount it is to provide by the total
   assessed value for the class. In practice, several calculations with different rates for different classes are
   normally made before the tax rates for the year are finally set.

   Taxation of utility and port properties
   Taxes on linear utility properties are normally based on assessed values determined by BC Assessment.
   However, the Local Government Act requires that a different method be used by B.C. municipalities for
   taxing the property of any electric light, power, telephone, water, gas, or closed-circuit television
   company operating within a municipality, wherein the tax is equal to one percent of the company’s gross
   rental or sales revenue from customers in the municipality.
       For the taxation of other utility properties, such as railways, a municipality can levy up to $40 per
   $1,000 or 2.5 times the class 6 (business) rate, whichever is greater. This rate cap was introduced by the
   provincial government in 1995 after it determined that municipal tax rates on linear utility properties had
   become too high in some cases and reform was warranted. The reform was part of an initiative that
   changed the ways railway properties were assessed, making B.C.’s railway property taxes fairer and more
   comparable to those elsewhere in Canada.
       In 2004, the provincial government placed a cap on the tax rates for certain class 4 (major industry)
   port properties in the municipalities of Delta, North Vancouver City, North Vancouver District, Port
   Moody, Prince Rupert, Squamish, and Vancouver. The legislation was extended in 2008. A cap of $27.50
   per $1,000 on the existing properties extends to 2018, while a cap of $22.50 per $1,000 for 10 years on
   new investment in those properties if constructed before 2018. The rate cap was imposed in response to
   concerns about the impact of municipal property taxes on the competitiveness of B.C. ports and the
   municipalities were compensated by the provincial government for their loss of revenue.
