                                                                                                  FINANCE     191


Exemptions and payments in lieu of taxes
The federal and provincial governments cannot tax each other, so federal properties are exempt from
property taxation. In recognition of local services, the government owning the property pays a payment in
lieu of taxes (also called grants in lieu) to the local government. These payments are generally included in
property tax revenue. Provincial legislation further requires that certain types of property be exempted
from taxation, including most provincial and municipal properties, public libraries, cemeteries, places of
worship, certain nonprofit homes for the elderly, hospitals, schools, fruit trees, sewage treatment plants,
and some specified farm property. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may also prescribe exemptions
with respect to specific industrial, business, community airport, or community port improvements.
     In addition to provincial exemptions, municipalities may exempt properties owned or used by chari-
table, philanthropic, or other not-for-profit corporations, properties owned or used by other local
authorities, and properties used for specified religious, seniors’ homes, private hospital, private school, or
recreation purposes. A municipality may also exempt properties to encourage various types of revitaliza-
tion, to achieve a range of environmental, economic, or social objectives. Municipalities may enter into
special tax exemption agreements with respect to heritage properties, riparian properties, cemetery
properties, and golf properties related to municipal service partnering agreements. These are specified
exceptions to a general prohibition on assistance to business. Regional districts have similar powers for
exemptions with the exception of for revitalization.

Property tax collection and enforcement
Property taxes are collected in B.C. by three types of taxing authorities: municipalities, the provincial
surveyor of taxes, and some improvement districts. In a municipality, taxes are collected by a municipal
officer whose duties must specifically include tax collection, although some municipalities’ tax bills are
processed by contractors. The municipal collector also collects taxes on behalf of the province (for school
purposes and for policing in municipalities under 5,000 population), regional districts, regional hospital
districts, BCAA, MFA, transit authority, and any other body whose taxing jurisdiction includes properties
in the municipality.
     In rural areas, the provincial surveyor of taxes collects provincial rural property taxes as well as other
property taxes on behalf of the various taxing jurisdictions. Improvement districts may levy their own
taxes directly or, if the services they provide include fire protection and/or streetlighting, may arrange to
have the taxes collected on their behalf by the appropriate municipal and/or provincial tax collector(s),
depending on where the improvement district is located.
     Municipalities and the surveyor of taxes mail annual tax notices in time for property owners to pay
their taxes by the due date, normally July 2. A municipality may establish one or more other due dates by
bylaw, in which case a property owner may elect to pay taxes either on July 2 or on the other date(s).
Improvement districts that collect their own taxes may establish their own schedules and other provisions
by bylaw.
     Each taxing authority enforces its powers and recovers delinquent taxes by charging interest, impos-
ing penalties, seizing personal or other property, accepting real property, proceeding with a tax sale of the
real property in question, or going to court. Annual tax sales for delinquent properties in municipalities
are held on the last Monday in September. Owners whose properties have been sold for taxes have one
year in which to redeem the properties by paying all outstanding taxes, interest, penalties, and costs.
Delinquent rural and improvement district properties forfeit to the Crown.
