192     LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   Property tax assistance programs
   The provincial government provides three property tax assistance programs through the Surveyor of
   Taxes Office. One, a farm extension program provides a time extension until October 31 for qualifying
   farms to pay current year taxes.
        A homeowner grant program introduced in 1957 offers grants to owner-occupiers of residential prop-
   erties to offset part of their school property tax burden. In practice, the grants are paid by the province
   directly to the tax collector on behalf of the property owners and are applied to school taxes first, then to
   municipal or other taxes. In 2008, they included a “regular grant” of up to $570 to a qualifying home-
   owner, provided that the net tax payment could not be reduced below $350, and an “additional grant” of
   up to $845 to a qualifying homeowner who is a senior, a veteran, or a disabled person, provided that the
   net tax payment could not be reduced below $100. These grants are phased out for high-valued homes,
   beginning at assessed values of $1,050,000 and are eliminated for homes assessed at $1,219,000 or more.
        A property tax deferment program introduced in 1974 offers low-interest loans to qualifying home-
   owners to help them pay their property taxes. The program benefits people who have low incomes, such
   as some seniors, by letting them remain in homes whose market value has increased to a point where they
   cannot afford to pay all the taxes. To qualify for the program, a person must be able to satisfy residency
   criteria, have a minimum equity in the home of 25 percent of the assessed value, and be at least 55 years
   old, or a surviving spouse, or a person with disabilities. In 2004, about 11,000 people were taking
   advantage of the program.

   Property taxation on Indian reserves
   In 1988, British Columbia was the only Canadian province in which provincial and local government
   property taxes were consistently levied on leasehold lands held by non-aboriginals on Indian reserves.
   This practice was controversial because the provincial government did not maintain the Indian reserve
   roads that served leaseholds in rural areas and there was evidence that, on average, municipalities only
   provided about 25 percent of the services to leaseholds that were provided to properties elsewhere in the
   municipality.34 In addition, the province, regional districts, and municipalities had no regulatory authority,
   such as land use regulation, on reserve lands. However, in some instances municipalities provided all
   services to leaseholds and, in some cases, to all reserve lands. In these cases, since the First Nation
   governments paid neither property taxes nor grants in lieu of taxes with respect to the unleased reserve
   lands, the services were delivered either through a contractual arrangement or on an informal basis.
        While some First Nations and municipalities had managed to resolve leasehold tax and service deliv-
   ery issues, there were many complaints. Some First Nations complained that leasehold values were
   reduced because taxes were levied but no services provided. Some municipal officials complained that
   they could neither collect taxes from status Indians nor regulate reserve lands within their boundaries. In
   addition, because of the difficulty of enforcing property tax collection on reserves, there was a relatively
   high incidence of delinquency. Delinquencies could be expensive for a municipality because it had
   limited ability to collect taxes levied but still had to pay other taxing jurisdictions, such as regional
   districts and school districts, the money that the municipality was required to collect on their behalf,
   whether the taxes were actually collected or not.
        Major changes were made in the legislation affecting Indian reserves in 1988 and 1990. In 1988,
   amendments to the federal Indian Act, called “the Kamloops amendments” after the band that initiated
   them, made it easier for all First Nations to introduce their own property taxation on reserves. To assist

   34
       Forty-five of approximately 1,600 Indian reserves in British Columbia were estimated to be located within municipal boundaries in 1988. In
  2008 the provincial government estimated that there are 1,703 reserves in the province but no adjusted numbers for those within municipalities
  were available.
