                                                                                                                                FINANCE         193


First Nations develop taxation regimes, the federal government established the Indian Taxation Advisory
Board (ITAB) to perform regulatory functions for First Nation taxation and in 2005, ITAB was replaced
by the more comprehensive First Nations Tax Commission.
     In 1990, the passage of B.C.’s Indian Self Government Enabling Act harmonized provincial practices
with the 1988 Indian Act amendments. By 2007, 82 Indian band council governments in B.C. and 114 in
Canada levied a total of over $49 million in taxes on reserve properties that had been leased to non-
aboriginal parties. Many have also formalized contractual relations with municipal governments to
purchase services, and some sit on regional district committees and pay for their share of a regional
district service. This indicates an increased understanding that jurisdictions that supply a service should
be able to collect appropriate fees or taxes to pay for the service and that taxes should not be levied where
services are not provided.

Property tax impact, incidence, and effects
Property tax policies and practices have important implications for the local economy and tax base. It is
important to understand the impacts, incidence, and longer-term effects of the use of property taxes as the
major source of local government financing.
    Property tax impacts are the costs generated or any problems taxpayers encounter in paying the bill.
Most residents with mortgages have the tax included as part of their monthly payments. The elderly and
disabled may defer tax payments and have them paid when they die or the property is sold. Farmers are
allowed to defer payment until October 31, when harvest revenues are realized. Others may have to write
large cheques once a year but an approximate amount is known well in advance. After income tax
payments are due, some businesses find their tax bills have a large impact on cash flow and reserves must
be set aside to pay them.
    Tax incidence refers to the actual burden of a tax that may be borne not only by the taxpayer, but by
other parties as well. Tax incidence must be understood before the criteria for taxation can be applied.
Tax incidence on owner-residential-occupied property is straightforward. The homeowner pays. The
homeowner also takes into account the amount of property taxes (and the benefits it finances) when
purchasing the residence. If taxes are raised or lowered significantly without a change in benefits, the tax
change may affect the price for which the homeowner can sell the house. With taxes higher, the price will
be lower and vice versa. This effect is called capitalization and it simply means that any significant
change in either taxes or benefits can be expected to be reflected in the market value of the residence
when it is sold. This results in the primary incidence of the tax accruing to the property owners at the time
the tax change occurs as initially a higher tax payment and subsequently as a lower value for their
property.
    The application of tax criteria to residential property taxation is straightforward. Because benefits
from local services accrue largely to residents they virtually always receive benefits in excess of their tax
costs. Residents in homes with similar assessed values pay the same tax (horizontal equity) and residents
in more valuable homes pay higher taxes (vertical equity). Within a jurisdiction, because residents with
more valuable homes pay higher taxes, there is a correlation of tax payments with ability to pay. This is
increased with the homeowner grant program, which provides greater relative relief to owners of lower-
valued homes.35


35
      The correlation between income and the assessed value of a residence is fairly high within a local government. However, there may be little
correlation in different parts of the province. For example, a high-income family in Prince George may reside in a physically nicer, but lower-
valued, house than a lower-income family in Vancouver. When property taxes are levied province-wide, the lower-income family in a high-
housing-value area may pay higher taxes than the higher-income family in a low-housing-value area. This is why property taxes are most
appropriately used by local governments.
