194   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       Residential property taxes in British Columbia generally do not exceed one percent of value and are
  known when residents purchase their house. A 2003 study (Bish 2003) indicated that median residential
  tax rates were the lowest in Canada. The effect of property taxes on residences should be minor,
  especially as they are more than offset by benefits.
       Tax incidence and the application of tax criteria to business is more complicated for two major rea-
  sons. One is tax shifting. The other is due to nonresidential properties being diverse, with no systematic
  relationship between their assessed values upon which the taxes are based, and the benefits received from
  local services. For example, a railroad that has properties with high assessed values receives virtually no
  benefits from local services, is extremely difficult to compare to other taxpayers and has a limited ability
  to pay because its income is low relative to the value of the property. In contrast, a bar that depends
  heavily on local services may occupy a property with a low assessed value and have a high ability to pay
  because its income is high relative to the value of the property. Furthermore, nonresidential school
  property taxes are the same throughout the province. This is likely to result in similar businesses paying
  significantly different taxes in different areas of the province because assessed values in some areas, such
  as the Lower Mainland, are much higher than assessed values in other parts of the province.
       Business property owners may try to shift the tax burden forward by increasing prices and/or shift it
  backward by reducing expenditures on labour, raw materials, and wholesale products. Whether or not it is
  possible to do this depends on the state of the markets in which they buy and sell. Sales could decline if
  customers resist paying higher prices, in which case some of the burden could be shifted backward as the
  businesses reduce their purchases of supplies. In most cases, it is difficult to shift the burden in this
  manner. Many large industry businesses cannot shift property taxes forward because they sell their
  products at world market prices. This includes the lumber, pulp, paper, minerals, oil, and gas industries.
  For profitable businesses there is some relief as the taxes are part of business costs and thus result in a
  lower income tax burden.
       If it is not possible to shift the tax burden forward to customers or back to suppliers, it must be borne
  by the property owner and/or the business owner. If the business is owned by stockholders whose
  earnings are reduced by the property taxes, they might shift their investments to other businesses. If the
  business owner is a tenant and the property owner tries to shift the tax burden by increasing the rent, the
  business owner could relocate to less costly premises. In both cases, the property owner may have to bear
  the full burden of the tax. For many large businesses, the business is the property owner.
       Where the full burden of the tax is borne by a business, the net annual income from the property is
  reduced by the amount of the tax and its sales value is reduced commensurately. In other words, the tax
  burden is capitalized into the value of the property. If the property is sold, the new owner does not bear
  the burden of the tax because it has already been reflected in the sales price, even though the new owner
  will continue to pay the annual property tax bill. For business, if the tax was in effect prior to purchasing
  the business, it should have been considered in the price paid for the business. Problems for business may
  arise from changed tax rates or from changed business conditions where the business revenue declines for
  other reasons.
       Tax shifting and diversity make the application of tax criteria to business very difficult. Because there
  is no systematic relationship between taxes paid and benefits received nor between the assessed value of a
  business (and its taxes) and its net income, there is no relation between taxes paid and ability to pay. This
  also means that criteria of neither horizontal nor vertical equity cannot be determined and are unlikely to
  be met.
       The effects of property taxation on business are related to the tax rates in individual municipalities. In
  general if taxes are not too far from benefits received and not higher than adjacent jurisdictions there are
  no adverse consequences. The overall level of property taxes on business relative to residential taxes, and
