                                                                                               FINANCE     195


the extremely high property tax rates on industry in some municipalities, may have negative conse-
quences for business investment and the overall investment climate in British Columbia. Several studies
have addressed these issues.

The relationship between residential and business property taxes
British Columbia’s municipalities have more discretion to set different property tax rates on different
classes of property than any other jurisdiction in Canada. Other provincial governments set the ratios
among property classes, have fewer business and industrial classes, and/or constrain tax ratio and rate
setting. Since 1984, when they were no longer required to base their tax rates on ratios set by the
province, B.C. municipalities have gradually increased the rates on business, industry, and utility classes
relative to residential tax rates. By 2003, some nonresidential rates and associated tax ratios were the
highest in North America. At the same time, the median rates on residential properties in B.C. were the
lowest in Canada. Studies that have been done on this issue include the following:
     • A 2006 study of British Columbia’s competitiveness determined that in some municipalities, high
         municipal property tax rates on major industry, such as pulp and paper mills, smelters, and ports,
         were creating a disincentive to investment and having a serious impact on the competitiveness of
         business, specifically the pulp and paper industry. The study concluded that the weighted average
         tax rate for the major industry class in the province was $40/$1,000 of assessed value compared
         to just over $4/$1,000 of the assessed value for the residential class. The significant uncertainty
         caused by the ability to adjust rates each year was also described as having a negative effect on
         B.C.’s competitiveness (B.C. Competition Council 2006).
     • A 2005 study confirmed that, relative to other property classes, major industry property assess-
         ments in B.C.’s industrial municipalities have declined over time while the tax rates on those
         properties have increased, such that municipal tax revenues from this source have remained rela-
         tively stable over the years. Any changes in tax policy to limit major industry tax rates would
         have the biggest negative impact on smaller resource towns with an undiversified tax base, since
         they depend on major industry revenue to provide more services than would be sustainable with-
         out the major industry tax base (Mezynska 2005).
     • A 2004 study of taxation in the two North Vancouver municipalities for the North Shore Water-
         front Industrial Association found that industrial taxpayers paid $2.45 in property taxes for each
         dollar of net services consumed while residential taxpayers in the City and District paid 58 cents
         and 86 cents respectively (MMK 2004).
     • A 2004 study of major industry taxation from 1990 to 2003, conducted for the Union of British
         Columbia Municipalities, found that major industry property assessment in the 73 or so B.C. mu-
         nicipalities with such properties had declined both absolutely and relatively, from an average of
         3.5 to 1.1 percent of their tax bases. At the same time the assessment for this class had increased
         in unincorporated areas. Almost all municipalities had increased their tax rates to compensate for
         the assessment decline and their annual revenue from the properties had actually increased by $23
         million. On average, more than 40 percent of the property tax revenue received by industrial
         towns with populations under 5,000 came from major industry (Adams 2004).
     • A 2003 study found that high tax rates imposed by the top quartile of municipalities on major
         industry properties, and to a lesser extent on utilities, were the highest in North America and may
         be contributing to a business climate problem in B.C. (Bish 2003).
     • A 1995 study of Vancouver’s property taxes for the City of Vancouver found that the taxes on
         business not only covered the costs of providing city services to commuters and shoppers coming
         into the city from other municipalities, they also contributed so much that local residential tax-
         payers only had to pay 50 cents for each dollar’s worth of services they received (KPMG 1995).
