196     LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



             In response, the City of Vancouver has pursued a policy of gradually shifting more of the tax bur-
             den to the residential class.
  The studies show that services to B.C. residential properties have been significantly subsidized by the
  taxes levied on nonresidential properties, especially those in the industrial class. There are two explana-
  tions for this.
       The history of industry support for local amenities in smaller municipalities led those municipalities
  to depend on its industrial tax base for support. Local industry management often supports the high taxes
  to finance amenities for their employees. However, with relatively high tax rates those towns have not
  attracted additional investment from existing industry or new industry—so they keep raising tax rates as
  the plant and equipment depreciated and assessments declined to maintain industry tax revenues. The
  mills and other heavy industry in these municipalities also cannot shift taxes to higher prices because their
  products are sold at world market prices in U.S. dollars. This has been exacerbated by the rise in the
  Canadian dollar, which in effect means their revenues in Canadian dollars, which they use to pay business
  costs and taxes, are lower. These towns are essentially in a property tax death-spiral because with high tax
  rates and as rates increase further, no business will make investments in the town and eventually the
  depreciating facility will close,36 and taxes on remaining residents and businesses will have to rise to
  maintain local services.37 Situations such as in Vancouver and the North Vancouver municipalities do not
  have the same history as their business taxes are not nearly as high as industry taxes in outlying towns.
  They seem to result from normal operation of democratic elections where elected officials respond to
  their voters.
       The second and rather unsurprising explanation is that municipal councils seek to satisfy their voters,
  who are largely residential property owners or tenants, by keeping residential property taxes low at the
  expense of nonresidential property owners. The councils can then provide more services for their
  residents than the residents would be willing to pay for because the tax burden can be shifted to nonresi-
  dential property owners, who subsidize the services to the residents. It is nice for residential property
  owners to reside in such a system, at least in the short run, but it is not so nice if the high taxes on
  nonresidential properties discourage investment and ultimately undermine the tax base. The structure of
  property tax rates in most municipalities it is quite straightforward. Except for farmers, the fewer the
  voters in a property class, the higher the tax rates.
       In recognition of the likely outcome from providing municipal councils with unlimited tax-rate-
  setting authority, other provinces either combine classes so all businesses are in a single class (which
  reduces the opportunities to tax industry higher than locally owned businesses) or fix the ratios among tax
  rates on different classes of property. In the U.S. virtually all state governments or state constitutions
  simply require that tax rates are the same for all kinds of properties.


   36
        It can be difficult to compare property tax rates with income and excise tax (GST) rates. Property tax rates are based on assessed or capital
  value while income and excise tax rates are based on an income flow or transaction. One simple approach is to estimate that a business expects a
  10 percent net return from a capital investment. A one percent property tax on the entire investment would be equivalent to a 10 percent income
  tax. The study of property tax rates on industry in 2003 (Bish 2003) found that the top quartile of municipal tax rates in B.C. municipalities was
  6.4 to 14.6 percent. If the expected net return on capital was 10 percent those rates are equivalent to income tax rates of 64 to 146 percent of the
  return on that investment. The “old tax is a good tax” often applies to existing business but it is very unlikely either old or new businesses will
  invest under these tax rates.

   37
        The increase in property taxes necessary to make up for the loss of industry property tax revenues will be borne primarily by existing
  property owners. New purchasers buying residences or business in the town will be able to take into account the high property tax rates when
  determining how much they are willing to pay for a house. Existing owners can remain and pay high taxes or sell their property for a lower
  market value as the cost of increased taxes is capitalized into their property value. If part of the economic base of the town is also eliminated so
  residential prices fall still further, these towns become desirable places for retirees to live as they often have excellent amenities, including
  community recreation facilities that were paid for by the former industrial property owners.
