                                                                                                   FINANCE     197


     In recognition of the problems associated with high tax rates on business and industry in some mu-
nicipalities, the provincial government legislated ceilings on port industrial property taxes, as previously
mentioned, and in 2007 passed legislation requiring all municipalities to meet new tax policy disclosure
requirements. The Community Charter now requires municipal five-year financial plans to include a more
explicit form of revenue and tax policy disclosure, which requires municipalities to include in the five-
year financial plan their objectives and policies regarding: (a) the proportion of total revenue that comes
from each of the funding sources; (b) the distribution of property taxes among the property classes; and
(c) the use of permissive tax exemptions (such as revitalization tax exemptions). These new revenue and
tax policy disclosure requirements further enhance municipal accountability to the public by requiring all
municipalities to develop and publicly disclose their objectives and policies in relation to their municipal
taxes. The development and disclosure of objectives and policies is intended to assist municipalities in
making more considered and meaningful decisions regarding their revenue and tax policies, including in
the distribution of property tax rates across property classes, such as major industry.
     There is a growing awareness among municipalities that the inequitable distribution of rates is a
problem. For example, in 2008, the City of Vancouver’s Property Tax Policy Review Commission
released its final report. The commission was established to engage with Vancouver’s business and
residential communities, as well as other stakeholders, to essentially “recommend to Vancouver City
Council a long-term policy that will define and achieve a ‘fair tax’ for commercial property taxpayers,
addressing the perceived inequity in the share of the City of Vancouver’s property tax levy that is paid by
the nonresidential property classes, as compared to the share paid by the residential property class.”

Observations on property taxes
British Columbia has one of the most highly evolved, geographically based, fiscally equivalent property
tax systems in North America. Standardized property assessments are exceptionally uniform at market
value across the province and the tax system is well administered. Homeowner grants and tax deferment
programs reduce the burden on occupants of lower-valued dwellings, the elderly, and the disabled, who
might otherwise be unable to afford to continue living in their homes. The regional district system allows
for a flexible pattern of internal divisions into various areas for supplying services, so that only the
properties within a given area are taxed for the services to that area. Likewise, a municipality can create
special taxing areas to pay for special services not provided elsewhere in the municipality. Both situations
provide opportunities for local people and their officials to relate local taxes to local benefits. In addition,
the proportion of school financing from property taxes has been reduced and school resources are
equalized province-wide. Social welfare and other services devoted primarily to income redistribution,
which were once funded by local property taxes, are now administered by the provincial government and
funded from general income and sales taxes.
    While the local government system possesses fiscal equivalence and residential property taxation is
reasonably structured, the balance between residential and nonresidential within municipalities appears
out of balance, with businesses subsidizing residential taxpayers. This raises questions of fairness in
larger municipalities, but its consequences in smaller, industry-dependent towns, are likely to be much
more serious.


12.5 Service Charges and Special Assessments
In addition to revenues from property taxes some local governments derive considerable operating
revenue from service or user charges, such as rentals, franchise fees, licence fees, fines, permit fees, and
sales of services (water, sewer, solid waste, transportation, recreation, education, etc.) to other govern-
ments, businesses, and individuals. These revenues constitute a third of municipal revenues, more than 70
