198    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   percent of GVRD, and nearly half of all regional district revenue. They are also the only funding source
   for some improvement districts.

   Rationale
   Service charges and special assessments can be used to finance the provision of any service for which the
   beneficiaries can be easily identified (individuals or small groups of property owners) or can be easily
   excluded unless payment is made (such as potential users of parking stalls), but they are more than simple
   revenue sources. Their special relationship to a benefit received can make information derived from their
   use important for decision making and their direct benefits-received nature provides them with a quality
   of fairness, in the sense of getting what you pay for, that may be lacking with general taxes. Licence and
   permit fees can also be fair when the revenues are used to provide a related service, such as when fees for
   dog licences are used to finance enforcement and pound services, or when building permit fees help
   finance building inspection department activities.
        The information component of service charges and special assessments is important. For a special
   assessment, an estimate is made of the costs of providing the service and what the assessment will be for
   each individual property owner in the group. If most property owners feel the benefits are worth the cost,
   the local government will provide the service. This moves decisions on public expenditures to a small
   group level, with beneficiaries and taxpayers having the major say in decisions. Thus, they can balance
   benefits against costs in their decision making in a way that is lacking when general government
   expenditures are considered separately from the taxes that pay for them.
        Revenues collected from user charges provide an indication of the current value of the service to the
   citizen consumers, and revenue and price information can provide a basis for local governments to make
   investment decisions. For example, a local government can use service charges to finance downtown
   parking facilities. If the facilities continually fill up, it can estimate the price increase necessary to ration
   the spaces available and determine if estimates of future revenues from expanded sales would be
   sufficient to construct additional parking facilities. If demand warrants, additional facilities can be
   constructed, with the additional revenues from their use paying for the construction. Thus, demands can
   be met as long as the citizens place a high enough value on the services to pay for them.
        There are some disincentives to the use of service charges for full cost recovery. Local officials may
   choose to charge less than full price to make the service more affordable for more people, especially
   lower-income citizens, or simply to help increase demand for the service. For example, few local
   governments set service charges for recreational facilities like playing fields for clubs and swimming
   pools at a sufficient level to recover costs, although in some cases they may subsidize certain services to
   lower-income users through a device such as a voucher system.
        Special assessments, such as local area service taxes within municipalities, are also levied on indi-
   viduals and businesses for specific goods or services provided to them. Thus, a special assessment is a
   kind of service charge imposed on a group of property owners for a specific service benefiting the group.
   Services funded by special assessments typically include water supply systems, sanitary sewer systems,
   curbs, sidewalks, underground wiring, snow removal, and public parking facilities but since 2004,
   municipalities can do any service on an area-by-area basis. The service may be delivered to all or most of
   the properties in a municipality, such as a water supply or sewerage system, or it may be a local area
   service, such as sidewalk paving or underground wiring. In the latter case, the service may have been
   requested in a petition from the local property owners or may have been initiated by the council, subject
   to a counter-petition or a local referendum.
        The special assessment may be in the form of a parcel tax (based on either a single amount, the tax-
   able area, or the taxable frontage instead of based on assessed value), although to use parcel taxes the
   local government must prepare its own parcel tax roll and appoint a parcel tax review panel to authenti-
