200    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA




   12.7 Government Transfers
   Historically, transfers of funds from other governments have been an important revenue source for local
   governments in B.C. While they have declined in importance for municipalities and regional districts,
   they account for almost all school district revenues. As indicated in Exhibit 12–1, government transfers
   comprised 40.3 percent of all local government revenues in 2006, including 7.4 percent for municipalities,
   10.7 percent for regional districts, 90.3 percent for school districts, and 22.5 percent for TransLink.
        Approximately 90 percent of transfers to municipalities and regional districts and 95 percent of trans-
   fers to school districts came from the provincial government. Transfers from the federal government
   accounted for most of the rest but this did not include federal contributions to federal-provincial programs
   administered by the province or UBCM. Transfers from other sources, including municipalities, regional
   districts, school districts, First Nations, improvement districts, and some non-public authorities, such as
   the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ green municipal funds, accounted for less than one percent of
   all municipal and regional district revenues.

   Rationale
   Activities where significant benefits accrue beyond a local government’s boundaries are unlikely to be
   provided at levels that reflect those benefits if all of the costs are borne by local taxpayers. These include
   activities for which the provincial or national government determine there is a provincial or federal
   interest such as encouraging energy-efficient programs. Transfers are also used when the larger govern-
   ment has responsibility, such as for welfare and other income redistribution activities, but where the
   activity itself is more effectively produced by a local government, as with social housing. Conditional
   transfers are specifically designed to encourage the local government to undertake activities it would not
   undertake without the payment.
        Conditional transfers to school districts, where they comprise 95 percent of school district revenues,
   involve a combination of external benefits because educated people move around, equalization among
   school districts with different levels of wealth, and provincial control. They have a different impact than
   when a local government funds 90 percent of its activity from own-source revenue and undertakes a small
   proportion of its activities from conditional transfers as do municipalities and regional districts.
        Unconditional transfers, often referred to as grants, are a small proportion of all transfers. While they
   appeal to local government officials who get funds to spend without having to impose taxes or charges,
   senior government officials would like to inform their taxpayers of specific benefits to be obtained and
   just giving money to other governments has not proved attractive relative to the use of conditional grants.
   The most important uses of unconditional transfers are to support local governance, especially smaller
   governments. From 1978 to 1994 the province had a much larger unconditional transfer program where it
   shared a percentage of the major provincial tax revenues with municipalities. The remnants of that
   program are small transfers to small local governments and regional districts. Instead, the province has
   turned to conditional transfer programs more focused on specific provincial priorities and to take
   advantage of federal involvement.

   Conditional transfers
   Provincial transfers to municipalities, regional districts, and prescribed related organizations are governed
   primarily by the 1994 Local Government Grants Act and regulations. The Act allows for funding a variety
   of projects including local government planning, growth management, restructuring, water supply,
   sewage disposal, highways, underground installation of utilities, and other infrastructure. There are
   specific ministry guidelines for the different kinds of transfers and the total must fit within the ministry
   budget. The Act also provides that the municipal affairs minister must consult with the Union of British
