                                                                                                 FINANCE     201


Columbia Municipalities (UBCM) at least annually regarding the amounts and administration of the
grants.
    The municipal affairs ministry also provides a number of specific funding programs to promote envi-
ronmental sustainability and healthier communities. These programs, which are in some instances
provided with assistance from federal and other provincial ministries, aim to, for example, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, improve drinking water and sewer services, provide greater access for seniors
and those with disabilities, and help build active communities. Some of these key programs include the
Canada-BC Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund, Towns For Tomorrow, BC Spirit Squares Program, and
the Green Cities Awards. Other provincial ministries and agencies also provide conditional transfers to
local governments for purposes that further their policies, including a number that are administered by the
UBCM. Programs administered by the UBCM included transfers to promote tourism, prepare emergency
response plans, improve fire protection in forest fringe areas, traffic safety, mosquito control, counter the
use of crystal meth, health promotion, develop innovative approaches to housing and senior programs
and, jointly with BC School Trustees, to strengthen school and community connections. Programs
administered by other provincial government ministries or agencies include grants for public libraries,
museums, crime prevention, emergency preparedness, cycling infrastructure, and roads that had been
transferred by the provincial government to local governments.
    The federal government has directly sponsored or contributed to a number of conditional funding
programs in B.C., such as the infrastructure and emergency preparedness programs mentioned above,
within the broader frameworks of such initiatives as the Canada Strategic Infrastructure Fund, the
Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund, and the Border Infrastructure Fund. In 2005, a new five-year New
Deal for Cities and Communities was introduced which provided for the transfer of $635.5 million in
federal gas tax revenues to B.C. local governments for projects aimed at improving air quality, drinking
water quality, waste management, public transit, and other items in support of an environmentally
sustainable local government infrastructure. This fund was extended through 2014 with $8 billion in new
funding in 2007. UBCM is a full participant in tailoring appropriate programs and administering the fund
in British Columbia.

Unconditional transfers
The unconditional transfers provided by the province to municipalities and regional districts are pre-
scribed in the Local Government Grants Act and regulations. While important for small municipalities,
they are a very small proportion of all local government funding. They include grants to small municipali-
ties, grants to regional districts, and traffic-fine revenue-sharing grants. The provincial government also
makes other unconditional transfers from time to time, which have included transfers to the Peace River
Regional District (to share some oil and gas revenue), and a transfer of a share of provincial casino
revenue with the municipalities within which casinos were located.

Observations on government transfers
Most government transfers in British Columbia are for activities of interest to the provincial (or national)
government where they want to encourage local governments to do something differently than they would
have done if the activity was financed by local taxpayers. One new feature is the direct involvement of the
UBCM in some of these grants. This gives UBCM the opportunity to design programs that meet member
needs and federal assessments indicate that UBCM’s programs are exceptionally well run. Unconditional
transfers support local governance by small municipalities and regional districts.
    The most significant change in local government finance over the past decades is the elimination of
taxation by school districts. When school districts do not levy taxes, even if they finance only a small
proportion of their expenditures, there is very little reason for most residents to pay any attention to them.
