202    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



  The predicted result is that the members elected to the board are likely to be elected by only those
  interested in higher expenditures on education, primarily parents, teachers and their unions. The result is
  that the school board can turn into a lobbying agency to get more funds from the provincial government,
  rather than a board carefully considering how to balance educational needs against what their local
  taxpayers are willing to pay. Ministry control, has led to the proportion of school district spending relative
  to municipal spending to fall over time.


   12.8 Debt Finance and Reserve Funding
  The financing of local government activities through borrowing and reserve funding is not separately
  indicated in Exhibits 12–1, 12–2, and 12–3 because longer-term debt is repaid over a period of years, debt
  incurred through borrowing in anticipation of revenue is simply repaid during the current year, and money
  placed in a reserve fund is not counted as an expenditure until it is spent, in some cases it is also not
  counted as revenue until it is spent.
      For municipalities and regional districts, repayments of interest on long-term debt are included in the
  annual operating expenditure for each function, but repayment of the principal is not, just as the money
  borrowed for capital works is not included in the annual operating revenue. With respect to the other local
  governments, regional hospital district revenues are used primarily for servicing debt, some TransLink
  revenues are used for paying interest on debt, and long-term borrowing for school districts is handled
  directly by the provincial government.

   Rationale
   The rationale for local government debt is simple. For short-term debt, some municipalities borrow at the
   beginning of the year because property tax revenues do not come in until July. They then pay off the debt.
   More important is long-term debt for major capital expenditures. Use of debt finance for major capital
   expenditures means the local government does not have to raise large irregular sums of money, and it is
   appropriate that the beneficiaries of the project pay for it over the lifetime of its use.

   Debt finance procedures
   The provincial government has historically supervised local government borrowing very closely.
   Municipalities and regional districts must follow prescribed procedures. The Islands Trust cannot borrow
   money without ministerial approval, improvement district borrowing bylaws are subject to registration by
   the inspector of municipalities, regional hospital district borrowing bylaws must conform to provincial
   requirements, and regional library districts can only borrow money on a short-term basis to meet current
   expenditures. TransLink is an exception in that its board only needs to pass a resolution to authorize
   borrowing, although the resolution must be ratified by the mayors’ council.
        The province also restricts the aggregate size of the debt that a local government may incur. For ex-
   ample, in 2005 the Community Charter and Municipal Liabilities Regulation provided that a
   municipality’s annual cost of servicing its aggregate liabilities for the year could not exceed 25 percent of
   its annual revenue for the previous year, in accordance with definitions and calculations prescribed in the
   regulation, unless the inspector of municipalities approved an increase. Furthermore, as a conservative
   restriction for local governments that rely heavily on class 4 (major industry) tax revenue, the regulation
   provided that the tax rate used in calculating the applicable tax revenue from class 4 properties could not
   exceed the average rate in the province, as determined by the inspector of municipalities, and the total
   calculated assessed value of the class 4 properties could not exceed 20 percent of the total assessed value
   of all properties in the municipality. The South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Act
