                                                                                                   FINANCE     203


provides that TransLink’s outstanding debt obligations cannot exceed $1.05 billion or any increased
amount ratified by a resolution of the GVRD board of directors.
     A municipal council or regional district board can provide for short-term borrowing in anticipation of
revenue simply by passing a bylaw but, where it wishes to incur a longer-term debt, the bylaw must be
approved by the inspector of municipalities. If the repayment period will be longer than five years and the
money is being borrowed for capital purposes, a loan authorization bylaw must be approved by the
electors unless the annual cost of servicing all of the municipality’s liabilities is less than five percent of
the previous year’s total revenue or the work is ordered under the authority of the provincial inspector of
dikes, the Waste Management Act, the Environmental Management Act, or the Drinking Water Protection
Act. Approval of the electors may be obtained through a referendum or through the alternative approval
(counter-petition) process.
     When a municipality has adopted a loan authorization bylaw, it does not borrow the money directly.
Instead, it must ask the board of the regional district in which it is located to undertake the financing. If it
consents, the regional district board adopts a security-issuing bylaw providing for the issue of debentures
or other evidence of debt. A loan application, which includes the two bylaws, a liability servicing limit
certificate confirming the municipality’s ability to service the debt, and a ministry certificate of approval,
is then submitted for approval to the Municipal Finance Authority of British Columbia (MFA). Upon
approval, the MFA includes the amount to be borrowed in the value of securities it periodically issues in
the international money marketplace. The proceeds of the securities issued are then re-lent by the MFA to
the local governing bodies that had requested loans.
     With the exception of the City of Vancouver, which may incur long-term debt directly, all municipali-
ties and regional districts in B.C. must finance their long-term capital borrowing through the MFA. Like
the City of Vancouver, regional hospital districts and TransLink may finance long-term borrowing by
issuing their own securities or through the MFA. Municipalities and TransLink borrow through their
respective regional districts, as described above, while regional districts and regional hospital districts
borrow on their own behalf. Otherwise, the procedure for regional district borrowing is essentially the
same as for municipalities.
     To repay its MFA debt, a municipality transfers the required funds in accordance with the payment
schedule to the regional district, which in turn transfers the money to the MFA. The MFA then places it in
a sinking fund to secure eventual repayment of the money it owes to investors. In 2006, B.C. regional
districts processed almost $92 million in municipal MFA debt payments.
     Improvement districts must issue their own securities to finance their borrowing. Short-term borrow-
ing and capital leasing may also be financed through the MFA.

The Municipal Finance Authority
The Municipal Finance Authority (MFA) was established in 1970 to undertake long-term capital
borrowing on behalf of all regional districts and municipalities in B.C. It is a small operation with a staff
of eight people that handled investment portfolios worth more than five billion dollars in 2007. It is
governed by thirty-five regional district appointees, including eight from the Greater Vancouver Regional
District (GVRD), two from the Capital Regional District (CRD), and one from each of the other twenty-
five regional districts. MFA members meet twice a year and elect from amongst themselves a chair, a vice
chair, and a board of trustees, which must include four members from the GVRD, one from the CRD and
five from the other regional districts. The board develops policy and oversees operational activities.
    Since its inception, the MFA’s client base for long-term capital borrowing has expanded to include
the Greater Vancouver Water District, the Greater Vancouver Sewerage and Drainage District, regional
hospital districts, TransLink and two emergency communications corporations, one in Greater Vancouver
