204       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   (E-Comm), the other in Greater Victoria (CREST). In addition, the MFA has introduced several voluntary
   programs:
       • An interim financing program provides short-term financing at attractive rates (prime less ap-
          proximately 1.25 percent) for borrowing in anticipation of revenue, capital borrowing up to five
          years, temporary financing of capital projects, or temporary financing to meet current operating
          expenditures. Some B.C. municipalities, regional districts, and regional hospital districts, as well
          as E-Comm, CREST, TransLink, and the Okanagan-Kootenay Sterile Insect Release Program
          participated in this program in 2007.
       • A pooled leasing program provides low-cost, flexible financing for capital leasing of equipment
          or rolling stock at preferred rates of interest (prime less one percent). Program participants in
          2007 included some B.C. municipalities and regional districts, as well as the Oliver and West
          Shore Parks and Recreation Societies, the Greater Victoria Public Library, and municipalities in
          Alberta, Ontario, and the Yukon.
       • A pooled investment program provides opportunities for local governments and other bodies to
          invest surplus funds at better-than-market rates in three professionally managed investment funds.
          Program participants in 2007 included municipalities, regional districts, improvement districts,
          regional hospital districts, regional library districts, First Nations, TransLink, educational institu-
          tions, other governing bodies, and local government interest groups.
      More than 280 groups participated in at least one of these programs in 2007. In addition, the MFA offers
      a community bond alternative which provides for the purchase of bonds by community members in
      support of local projects, and a voluntary investment program for municipal employees, elected officials,
      and their partners. The MFA also offers financial forums, community workshops, and assistance to
      educational institutions.
          Protection for MFA investors is provided by the combined credit of the participating local governing
      bodies, which collectively stand behind the MFA’s obligations. In addition, the MFA has established a
      debt reserve fund to which each borrower sharing in the proceeds of a securities issue with a term of five
      years or more must contribute an amount equal to one-half of the borrower’s average annual debt
      payment. Ultimately, all MFA borrowing is secured by its unconditional legal authority to levy property
      taxes in all the jurisdictions it serves and in Vancouver, which essentially includes all the taxable land and
      improvements in the province. Consequently, MFA securities are consistently rated by Canadian and U.S.
      bond rating services in the highest category.

   Reserve funding
  Debt finance (buy now, pay later) and reserve funding (pay now, buy later) are both ways to “smooth out”
  capital expenditures over time. Reserve funds are particularly useful for things that may not be readily
  amenable to debt financing, such as smaller items of furniture or equipment, or items financed by
  development cost charge revenue that may not be spent in the same year as the money was received. A
  reserve fund must be established by bylaw and is not the same as a reserve account, which is merely a
  form of appropriated surplus usually established by resolution.
      Municipalities and regional districts may establish reserve funds for any of specific purposes, such as
  water supply, sewerage, roads, parks, general capital works, equipment replacement, land acquisition,
  local improvements, feasibility studies, etc. Reserve funds must be established for any money received
  from development cost charges, the sale or disposition of parkland, the disposal of highway property that
  provides access to water, off-street parking space or alternative transportation infrastructure payments,
  and the sale of land and improvements (except tax sales). An improvement district is required to establish
  a reserve fund for renewing the works of each service it provides.
