                                                                                                   FINANCE     205


     In general, the money in a given municipal or regional district reserve fund can be used only for its
stated purpose but, if the amount in the fund exceeds what is required for that purpose, some or all of the
money can be transferred to another reserve fund. As well, local government may borrow internally from
one capital reserve fund to another subject to repayment requirements. Money in a development cost
charge reserve fund or a parkland acquisition reserve fund can only be transferred to another fund if the
relevant bylaw is approved by the minister.

Observations on debt finance
The system of local government debt finance in B.C. through the Municipal Finance Authority exempli-
fies an exceptionally successful cooperative approach to financing regional district and municipal
investments in roads, sewers, water systems, and other infrastructure. By acting on behalf of all regional
districts and municipalities, the MFA is able to obtain more favourable borrowing terms than individual
local governments could get on their own. With the small premium it collects on borrowing by local
governments, the MFA has created a fund that would cover any failure by a local government to meet its
payments. Long-term borrowing is not permitted to meet current expenses, but is reserved, as it should be,
for financing projects with long-term benefits.


12.9 Observations on Local Government Finance
It is impossible for any analyst or group of analysts in Victoria to determine if local governments in
British Columbia are functioning responsibly and efficiently. It is possible, however, to see if the Local
Government Act, Community Charter, and other legislation under which local governments operate
provide a framework for local citizens to resolve their own problems efficiently. This in turn requires that
local citizens and local officials account for both the benefits and costs of their actions.
     There appear to be only two arrangements where problems should be predicted. One is the property
tax death-spiral that small, single-industry towns have experienced by relying on higher and higher tax
rates on depreciating industrial assessments so that new investments are discouraged. As existing plants
become obsolete, they will be abandoned rather than renewed and the municipality will have a tax rate
crisis for its residents. This dynamic is not the only problem for small towns but it is a serious one. The
benefits-received imbalance between residents and businesses is a problem in some other municipalities,
because of the fairness of taxing business for benefits that residents may not be willing to pay for. While
this is a fairness and efficiency problem, it is unlikely to lead to the kind of crisis facing small, industrial
towns.
     The second arrangement is the current organization and operation of school financing. No matter how
hard a ministry tries, it cannot monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the production of education by
school districts. To create a situation where locally elected members have no incentive to balance
taxpayer-funded costs against benefits is unlikely to result in good performance. That will depend on the
administrators. With the ministry providing almost all financing, it is likely to become less and less clear
what role school boards have in the delivery of education in the province.
     Except for the variable tax rate structure, the financing of school districts, and some of the regulatory
practices presented in Chapter 10, the British Columbia local government system is characterized by a
high degree of fiscal equivalence. This is the single most important characteristic of a polycentric local
government system such as in B.C. Equally important, the reliance on the property tax and service
charges for the great proportion of municipal, regional district, and other local government revenues
(except schools) is appropriate to this system, as is the use of provincial and federal government transfers
to achieve broader objectives. The philosophy of local governance and the financing system match.
