                                                                            CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS         207




 Chapter Thirteen
Concluding Observations


B
         ritish Columbia is a large and diverse province. Its settlements include isolated fishing villages,
         farming villages, diversified manufacturing and marketing centres, and the large urban agglom-
         erations of the Lower Mainland, southern Vancouver Island, and the Okanagan.
    Most of the economic activity within British Columbia occurs through private market transactions.
However, some kinds of problems, such as public goods, common pools, external effects, and utilities, are
best dealt with collectively. To achieve their resolution, over 500 local governments have been created.
Policymaking in these local governments is the responsibility of over 2,000 elected officials and
numerous appointed boards and commissions. In 2006 these officials employed more than 90,000 people
and incurred expenditures of over $13 billion, more than $3,000 for every person in the province.
    Some goods and services provided by local governments are easily measurable but others have no
common measuring unit. Some are delivered or produced primarily by labour, others by machinery, and
others by capital equipment. Some are delivered through individualized face-to-face interaction between
the provider and the citizen, while others are delivered impersonally. This diversity has led to the use of a
variety of production arrangements, including own-forces production, joint arrangements, public-private
partnerships, contracts, corporations, franchises, and volunteer production. At the same time, the diversity
of goods and services and the difficulty of measuring outputs have made comparisons of performance and
evaluations of efficiency difficult.
    The structure of local government that has evolved within the parameters of provincial legislation is
extremely diverse. While it began with municipalities and school districts, like most of North America, it
has evolved to include regional districts, with their electoral areas and service areas, local community
commissions, an Indian District, the Islands Trust, single- and multipurpose improvement districts,
regional library districts, regional hospital districts, regional health boards, a regional transportation
authority, water users’ communities, and local service areas. Of these organizations, British Columbia’s
regional districts are one of the most innovative forms of local government in North America.
    The examination of local government in the preceding 12 chapters reveals an evolutionary structure
with a distinct problem-solving orientation. Reform ideologies, such as those advocating the separation of
politics from administration, the creation of strong city manager systems, or the consolidation of smaller
local governments into larger, comprehensive local governments for each urban region, have not had a
major impact in British Columbia. Instead, elected officials are involved in administration as well as
policymaking, city managers are closely controlled by elected officials, and urban areas are populated by
numerous independent local governments. This reflects traditions of local self-government.
    The provincial government sets the framework within which local governments are organized and
function. The rules established by the province permit institutional flexibility while ensuring consistency
where necessary, so that finances and debt creation are managed properly. Within a local government the
council or board is responsible for the effectiveness and efficiency of its operations. For some functions,
such as education and health services, the provincial ministries play a much larger role and local
governments have less autonomy.
