                                                                                      APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS                         209




     Appendix:
First Nations Governments


L
         ocal and First Nations governments in British Columbia are becoming increasingly interested in
         collaborating to provide, share, and develop local services. These emerging relationships are
         growing as a result of the growing number of First Nations assuming responsibility for self-
government and providing local services.
     In 1997, the Union of British Columbia Municipalities (UBCM) and the First Nations Summit orga-
nized a provincial forum that brought representatives from local and First Nations governments together
to discuss goals and opportunities to work together. The success of this event helped to establish the
Community to Community Forum Program, which is unique in Canada. The program provides grants to
hold forums between local and First Nations elected officials and is jointly funded by the provincial and
federal governments. Since 1997, more than 130 local governments and close to 200 First Nations have
participated in 170 forums around the province. As a result of the forums, numerous protocol agreements
and memorandums of understanding have been signed by the parties, which have helped establish formal
communication lines and build relationships in areas that include servicing, economic development, and
business collaboration.
     The following material provides an overview of some First Nations governments and examples of
relationships being established between local government and First Nations in B.C. The statistics in this
Appendix are from 2006 and were obtained from the Government of Canada and Census Canada
websites.


Indian Bands
Most First Nations governments in B.C. operate under the federal Indian Act. This federal legislation
establishes that the basic unit of First Nations governance in B.C. is a band governed by a council elected
by members of the First Nation. The council consists of a chief and from one to twelve councillors, based
on a formula of one councillor for every 100 members.
    Each First Nation has reserve lands38 set aside by the federal Crown and the federal government
provides funding for services in accordance with its constitutional obligations.39 In 2006, there were just
over 200 Indian bands and over 1,700 reserves in B.C. for a total area of 343,741 hectares or 0.36 percent
of the province’s total land area. The population centres on reserve lands are called villages, reflecting
traditional aboriginal organization that preceded the establishment of reserves and the introduction of the
Indian Act.
    First Nations in B.C. vary in size. In 2006, the average size was about 600 members per band. The
largest was the Cowichan Tribes near Duncan with 4,200 members and the smallest was the Popkum



38
      Legal title to reserve land is held by the federal Crown for the use and benefit of specific First Nations through the bands recognized under
the Indian Act. Section 29 of the Indian Act protects reserve lands from seizure under legal process.

39
      Under the Indian Act, the relationship between the federal government and Indian bands is trust-like, where the federal government has
fiduciary obligations to the Indian bands under its jurisdiction.
