210   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



  Band near Hope with eight members. In 2006, the total aboriginal population of B.C. was about 196,075.
  About 26 percent of the aboriginal population in B.C. lived on reserve lands.
      In some respects, First Nations governments are similar to small municipal governments in that they
  provide basic local services for residents living within a defined territory. Both governments can make
  bylaws and create a variety of boards, societies, commissions, or committees to support the activities of
  the elected councils, and both provide a variety of services on different scales to residents. Sections 81, 83
  and 85 of the Indian Act give band councils the power to enact bylaws applicable to lands within their
  reserve boundaries.
      With respect to how they are elected and what additional services they provide, First Nations gov-
  ernments are different from small municipal governments. A municipal council is elected by voters who
  reside within the municipality at the time of the election, but a First Nations council is elected by band
  members who are formally registered on a list maintained either by the First Nation and/or Indian and
  Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), and who may or may not reside on First Nations reserve lands. In
  addition, First Nations election practices may vary from those prescribed by INAC through the develop-
  ment of a custom code. This can mean that First Nations could hold elections every three years, rather
  than two, or be governed by a traditional or customary method of governance, such as a hereditary
  system, with only limited responsibilities assigned to the First Nation elected council. In this case, a band
  council’s powers may be more limited in scope than those of a small municipal council.
      The range of services provided to band members living on reserves varies considerably, depending on
  factors such as the size and geographic location of the reserve population. At one time, the federal
  government provided virtually all the funding for services on reserve. Over time this has changed and
  now First Nations governments may also receive revenue from other federal departments, the provincial
  government, trust account earnings, leaseholds, on-reserve enterprises, user charges, and property taxes
  from aboriginal and non-aboriginal leaseholders.
      On reserve, First Nations governments are engaged in a range of services that cover social, cultural,
  education, child welfare, and health services. Police protection can be delivered by provincial units of the
  RCMP, through contract with municipal forces, and by the First Nation. Other local services, such as fire
  protection, water supply, waste, and road system management, may be delivered by the First Nation,
  through contracts with private firms, and through contracts with nearby local governments.


   Sechelt Indian Band
  Located on the Sunshine Coast about 50 kilometres north of the Lower Mainland, the Sechelt Indian Band
  (SIB) became the first band in B.C. to negotiate a type of self-government agreement that was completely
  outside the provisions of the Indian Act. In 1986, after many years of negotiations, the federal Sechelt
  Indian Band Self-Government Act was passed, providing the SIB with powers for self-government, and
  the band subsequently adopted its own constitution and criteria for membership. Determination of SIB
  members’ Indian status continues under the Indian Act.
      In 1987, B.C. passed the Sechelt Indian Government District Enabling Act (SIGD Act) that enabled
  the SIB to become the first Indian government district (IGD) in B.C. This legislation recognizes that the
  SIB will exercise its federally defined powers in the provincial sphere and over non-Indian residents of
  the IGD. The Sechelt IGD mimics a municipality in terms of its jurisdiction for property taxation and
  servicing, though it is not actually incorporated as such. The SIGD Act also enables IGD membership in
  the Sunshine Coast Regional District. In 2006, the provisions of the Act were renewed for an additional
  20 years.
      The IGD and the SIB are governed through a council structure. Members of the SIB elect a chief and
  council for three-year terms under the conditions of the SIB constitution. The SIB council oversees
