                                                                APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS          211


jurisdiction relating to social development, education, housing, public works, resource management,
community health, economic development, and culture and recreation. The members of the SIB council
also make up the IGD council, which holds the legal powers of the IGD and is the decision-making body
with respect to zoning and land use, building construction and maintenance, taxation for local purposes,
public order and safety, road construction, traffic regulation, and operation of businesses. The IGD
council acts on behalf of all residents residing on reserve lands and its bylaws apply to all residents, while
SIB council bylaws apply only to band members.
     In addition to the IGD council, an advisory council created by the SIGD Act forms part of the IGD
structure. The advisory council’s purpose is to allow participation by non-member lessees living on
reserve lands in the decision making of the IGD council on local servicing matters. Any resident living on
reserve lands may run for election for the advisory council. Five members are elected for three-year terms
under the provincial Local Government Act election provisions.
     Under the self-government agreement, reserve lands are now owned by the SIB in fee simple, though
they retain reserve status and remain under federal jurisdiction. Provincial and federal laws of general
application apply to reserve lands. Both the SIB and IGD are vested with the rights and obligations of a
natural person, which includes the capacity to sue and be sued, to make contracts, to invest and borrow
money, and to acquire and hold property.
     It should be noted that the Sechelt self-government agreement is a delegated arrangement and does
not abrogate or derogate from any land claims process or treaty negotiation being undertaken by the SIB.
Currently, the SIB is in stage five of the six-stage B.C. treaty process.


Indian Self Government Enabling Act, 1990
In 1988, amendments to Section 83 (taxation) of the federal Indian Act made it easier for all First Nations
to introduce a system for property taxation on reserves and to pass taxation bylaws. The Indian Taxation
Advisory Board (ITAB) was created to provide technical assistance on the development and implementa-
tion of section 83 bylaws. ITAB also reviewed bylaws and made recommendations to the federal minister
for their approval. The board was made up of five regionally based representatives of aboriginal descent.
It has been superseded by the First Nations Tax Commission.
     In 1990, B.C.’s Indian Self Government Enabling Act harmonized provincial practices with the fed-
eral legislation by providing First Nations with options for exercising their taxation jurisdiction. The Act
also included an option for other First Nations to adopt the SIB model and participate as Indian govern-
ment districts in the local government system. However, to date, no other First Nations have expressed an
interest in this option.


First Nations Land Management Act, 1999
In 1996, 14 First Nations in Canada seeking greater control over their land and resources negotiated the
Framework Agreement on First Nations Land Management (Framework Agreement), a government-to-
government relationship with the federal government.
    In June 1999, the First Nations Land Management Act (FNLMA) was ratified by the federal govern-
ment that brought into effect the Framework Agreement. The FNLMA is a governance arrangement that
allows signatory First Nations, who apply and qualify for the process, to manage their reserve land and
resources outside of the Indian Act.
    Bands develop their own land code that must be ratified by band members. Bands then negotiate an
individual Framework Agreement with INAC, which is implemented with the approval of the minister.
