212    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



      The FNLMA allows First Nations to manage their reserve lands and resources, though title remains
  vested in the Crown for the use of the First Nation. If new lands are acquired following a treaty or land
  claims settlement, the FNLMA only applies if the new lands are designated as treaty settlement lands.
      Under FNLMA, First Nations have jurisdiction to manage forestry and agriculture resources on their
  lands, while fisheries, oil and gas resources, subsurface rights, migratory birds, and endangered species
  remain outside their jurisdiction. Individual land codes differ, but all First Nations under the FNLMA
  may make laws pertaining to development (includes zoning and servicing), conservation (includes
  environmental protection), and protection, management, use, and possession of reserve lands. First
  Nations can generate revenues by leasing and granting rights and licences on First Nations land. A First
  Nation can also develop its own land.
      As of October 2007, 25 First Nations in British Columbia are signatories to the Framework Agree-
  ment and have either developed their land codes or have the option to do so.


   Nisga’a Final Agreement
   In 1998, the Nisga’a Lisims Government (NLG) was established under the terms of a treaty between the
   Nisga’a Tribal Council, Canada and B.C. The Constitution of the Nisga’a Nation provides for the NLG to
   consist of five main parts: a legislature; an executive; four village governments; a council of elders; and
   “urban locals” in Vancouver, Terrace, Prince Rupert and any other local area “determined in accordance
   with Nisga’a law.” Beginning in 2000, elections for NLG officers, village government chiefs and
   councils, urban local representatives and other elected offices in Nisga’a public institutions take place
   every four years. The elected officials and voters must be Nisga’a citizens, but non-Nisga’a people
   residing on Nisga’a lands can be consulted about decisions, seek review of decisions, and participate in
   elected bodies where their interests are “directly and significantly” affected.
        In 2006, there were about 5,500 Nisga’a citizens. Of those, almost two-thirds resided outside Nisga’a
   territory. Nisga’a citizens must meet specified eligibility and enrollment criteria that allow the enrollment
   of non-aboriginal people in very limited circumstances. Under the terms of the treaty, Nisga’a citizens
   continue to be aboriginal people but their aboriginal rights under the Constitution Act, 1982 are modified
   into treaty rights, which are exhaustively defined in the treaty. The Indian Act no longer applies except to
   determine who is a status Indian. Their Indian Act tax exemptions for transaction taxes (PST and GST)
   expired May 31, 2008, and the tax exemption for income tax will expire December 31, 2012.
        The lands in Nisga’a jurisdiction comprise 1992 square kilometres in the lower Nass River area,
   located in Electoral Area A of the Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine (RDKS), about 100 kilometres
   from Terrace in northwestern B.C. The Nisga’a own all the forest resources on Nisga’a lands and also
   own another 27.5 square kilometres of lands that are subject to the laws of B.C. All lands owned by the
   Nisga’a are held in fee simple and are constitutionally protected.
        The Nisga’a have established a land title system that is similar to and harmonious with the B.C. Tor-
   rens system. In accordance with the treaty, replacement tenures have been issued for continuing the legal
   interests of other parties in lands within Nisga’a jurisdiction, including fee-simple lands, agricultural
   leases, wood lot licences, submerged lands, rights of way, the Nisga’a highway, and other key roads held
   by the province.
        Fee-simple property owners and third-party tenure holders have guaranteed access to their interests
   and the public has access to Nisga’a lands for hunting, fishing, and recreation, although the NLG may
   regulate access for public safety and protection of environmental, cultural, or historic features. The
   federal and provincial governments may acquire interests in Nisga’a lands for purposes such as rights of
   way, subject to fair compensation.
