                                                                APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS         213


     Wilp Si’ayuukhl Nisga’a (WSN) is the elected legislative body. Its members include a speaker, a
deputy speaker, officers of the government executive, the chairperson of the council of elders, the village
governments, and the urban local representatives. The council of elders advises the government on
matters relating to the traditional values of the Nisga’a Nation and is composed of a chairperson, seven
other elders, including simgiigat (hereditary chiefs) and sigidimhaanak (hereditary matriarchs), and eight
alternates, all of whom are appointed by the NLG Executive Committee for staggered two-year terms.
     The NLG Executive Committee consists of the president of the Nisga’a Nation, the executive chair-
person, the secretary-treasurer, the chairperson of the council of elders, the chiefs of the village
governments, and one representative from each urban local. It can make regulations and oversees the
administration of the government.
     In 2005, the central administrative structure included more than 50 staff in five directorates: programs
and services, lands and resources, fisheries and wildlife, communications and intergovernmental relations,
and finance. The programs and services directorate includes child and family services, an enrollment and
eligibility department, a justice department, and an Ayuukhl Nisga'a department which is responsible for
the preservation and promotion of Nisga’a language, culture, and history. Each of the five directorates is
overseen by a committee of the executive.
     Wilp Si'ayuukhl Nisga'a can make laws regarding culture, language, public works, transportation,
land use, solemnization of marriages, health, child welfare, and education services, but it has no exclusive
powers. Constraints on NLG legislative and other powers include:
     • All NLG law-making powers are concurrent with those of Canada and British Columbia, whose
          laws of general application apply to the Nisga’a unless varied by terms of the treaty.
     • The Criminal Code of Canada and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms apply to the
          Nisga’a people.
     • NLG regulatory standards with respect to forests are to meet or exceed provincial standards.
     • The province retains full ownership and regulatory authority over water. Existing water licences
          remain in place. The Nisga’a are allocated one percent of the average annual flow from the Nass
          Valley watershed for domestic, industrial, and agricultural needs. Any Nisga’a hydro develop-
          ment project would be subject to B.C. approval and regulation.
     • Canada and B.C. retain responsibility for fisheries conservation and management. The Nisga’a
          have an annual allocation of Nass River fish, and can sell them under certain conditions, but can-
          not establish large fish processing facilities until 2008.
     • Existing traplines are under NLG jurisdiction; guide outfitter and angling guide tenures remain
          under provincial jurisdiction.
     • Nisga’a hunting is subject to conservation, public health, and public safety requirements, and
          cannot interfere with other authorized uses of Crown land or the ability of the Crown to dispose
          of Crown land. The Nisga’a must prepare an annual wildlife harvest management plan for pro-
          vincial approval and cannot sell wildlife, but they can continue to trade and barter among
          themselves or with other aboriginal peoples. Nisga’a citizens who hunt wildlife outside the Nass
          Wildlife Area, which includes the NLG lands and some Crown lands, are subject to provincial
          laws.
     • The NLG has concurrent authority with Canada and B.C. for environmental assessment and pro-
          tection on Nisga’a lands, but federal and provincial laws prevail if a conflict occurs. B.C. and
          Canada may respond to natural disasters and environmental emergencies on Nisga’a lands.
     • The Nisga’a Memorial Lava Bed Park, Bear Glacier Park, and the Gingietl Creek Ecological
          Reserve remain under provincial ownership. The Nisga’a Memorial Lava Bed Park and Bear Gla-
          cier Park are established as Class A provincial parks and operate under a co-management
          arrangement with NLG.
