214       LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



          •   Key cultural sites are designated provincial heritage sites under provincial legislation. Key geo-
              graphic features are given Nisga’a names in accordance with provincial policy.
          •   The NLG can provide its own police protection service, subject to provincial approval. The serv-
              ice must meet the provincial requirements that apply to municipal police in B.C. with respect to
              training, qualifications, and professional standards. In 2008, the Nisga’a, Canada, and B.C. oper-
              ated the police service under a tripartite agreement delivered by the Lisims-Nass Valley
              detachment of the RCMP.
          •   The NLG can establish a Nisga’a court with jurisdiction over Nisga’a laws on Nisga’a lands,
              subject to provincial approval. The court must meet provincial standards for independence, ac-
              countability and supervision. Accused persons may also choose to have their cases heard in B.C.
              Provincial Court.
      The treaty provided for a dispute resolution process and two joint management committees, each with
      representatives of the Nisga’a, B.C., and Canada, to make recommendations to the responsible federal and
      provincial ministers respecting Nisga’a fisheries and wildlife management activities.
           The NLG can enter into service agreements with the RDKS and otherwise coordinate activities with
      respect to common areas of responsibility. Nisga’a citizens may vote in local municipal and regional
      district elections, depending on where they live in the RDKS. As the Nisga’a population is the majority in
      Electoral Area A they have consistently elected a Nisga’a citizen to the RDKS board as the electoral area
      director. This director represents all residents of the area, including those not on Nisga’a lands.
           Several key services that the NLG could provide directly are still provided by agencies that delivered
      them before the treaty was signed.
           • Nisga’a School District 92, established in 1974 under the B.C. School Act, delivers K–12 educa-
               tional services that emphasize Nisga’a language and culture. It is governed by a board of five
               trustees elected for three-year terms.
           • The Nisga’a Valley Health Authority, established in 1984 under the B.C. Society Act, delivers a
               range of health services through a contract with the provincial government and functions inde-
               pendently of the provincial health authorities. It is governed by six directors, five elected for four-
               year terms, plus one appointed by the NLG.
           • Wilp Wilxo’oskwhl Nisga’a Institute (the Nisga’a university college [WWNI]), established in
               1993 under the B.C. Society Act, provides adult education and related services. It is governed by
               ten or eleven directors, including a chairperson, the president, an elder, and one representative for
               each of the four village governments, the urban locals, the faculty, and the student body. The
               WWNI is a degree-granting institution under terms of an agreement with the University of North-
               ern British Columbia. The WWNI also delivers programs under agreements with the Simon
               Fraser University, Northwest Community College, and the B.C. Justice Institute.
  The school and health boards both include four members elected by village citizens and one elected by
  the non-aboriginal population in the area. All members of the WWNI board are appointed by the
  executive or the village governments, except for the faculty and student representatives who are elected
  by their peers. The NLG could exercise more direct jurisdiction over any of these services but has not yet
  chosen to do so.
       The four Nisga’a villages are New Aiyansh (also known as Gitlaxt’aamiks), Gitwinksihlkw (formerly
  known as Canyon City), Laxgalt’sap (formerly known as Greenville), and Gingolx (formerly known as
  Kincolith). Each has its own charter and the legal capacity to contract. They are governed by elected
  village chiefs and four to eight councillors, depending on the size of the resident population. The village
  governments make laws regarding local matters and sit as members of Wilp Si’ayuukhl Nisga’a. New
