                                                               APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS         215


Aiyansh, the largest village with a population of about 900 people, is the seat of the central Nisga’a
Lisims Government.
    The village governments are responsible for local services, programs, and regulations. For example,
the Gitwinksihlkw Village Government’s functions include governance and administration, community
planning and development, social development, education, infrastructure maintenance, fire protection,
emergency response, parks and recreation, and search-and-rescue services. Each village fire chief serves
as the local assistant to the provincial fire commissioner under the Fire Services Act. Like the govern-
ments of other small communities, the administrative staff size in the villages is small, ranging from
about 25 in New Aiyansh (the largest village) to 12 in Gitwinksihlkw (the smallest village).
    The NLG receives fiscal transfers from Canada and B.C. that enable it to provide government serv-
ices at levels comparable to those generally available in northwest B.C. The fiscal financing agreements
are negotiated every five years and take into account the NLG’s ability to raise funds from other sources,
such as the community’s fisheries, forestry, and tourism activities. In 2008, the NLG continued to operate
under the first fiscal financing agreement as negotiations for the second fiscal financing agreement
continued.
    Like other local governments in Canada, the NLG’s activities are generally tax-exempt. It can levy
direct taxes on Nisga’a citizens on Nisga’a lands. If and when it imposes property taxes on its citizens, it
may negotiate a tax delegation agreement with B.C. to permit it to impose property taxes on non-Nisga’a
occupiers of Nisga’a lands. In the meantime, provincial taxing authorities continue to have the power to
levy property taxes on non-Nisga’a occupiers of Nisga’a lands as well as provincially incorporated
businesses.


Westbank First Nation
In 2004, the Westbank First Nation Self-Government Agreement (Agreement) was ratified by Canada
through the passage of the Westbank First Nation Self-Government Act. This legislation gave the
Agreement the force of law and recognizes Westbank First Nation (WFN) jurisdiction in several
important areas.
     However, the Agreement, is not a treaty and may be superseded by the outcome of future treaty nego-
tiations. The Agreement differs from others reached in B.C. as the provincial government was not a party
to the agreement.
     Democratic elections of council, procedures for the passage and amendment of laws, financial ac-
countability, and provisions for establishing WFN membership, amongst other matters, are set out in the
WFN constitution as required by the Agreement. The WFN constitution was ratified by the WFN
community at the same time as the Agreement and was developed by a community working group. The
WFN Constitution also includes provisions respecting the creation, holding, and disposition of Westbank
lands.
     The Agreement essentially removes the application of the Indian Act on Westbank lands. WFN mem-
bers retain their Indian status as defined by the Indian Act and in many areas of WFN jurisdiction, the
Indian Act continues to apply until the WFN passes a law in its stead. WFN may enter into agreements for
providing services with other governments and may make agreements concerning land, water, and other
resources with other governments.
     The Agreement does not involve a change in the amount or type of lands set aside for WFN and WFN
lands remain federal lands as “lands reserved for the Indians” within the meaning of section 91(24) of the
Constitution Act, 1867. For a short period prior to the Agreement, WFN lands were managed under a
First Nations Land Management Act land code. The FNLMA no longer applies to WFN and, as with
bylaws that were previously in effect under the Indian Act, laws passed under the land code remain in
