216    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   force as WFN laws under self-government. The Westbank First Nation Self-Government Act recognizes
   WFN jurisdiction over the management, regulation, use, and protection of WFN lands, which includes
   zoning and land use planning.
        In addition to land management, WFN may make laws concerning renewable resources such as wild-
   life, hunting, trapping, and forestry. WFN may regulate and manage their non-renewable resources,
   including oil and gas and surface minerals. Environmental standards and conservation must be greater
   than or equivalent to related provincial laws in that area. Other areas of jurisdiction include public works,
   infrastructure and local services, K–12 education, and Okanagan language and culture preservation. The
   Agreement also provides that there must be a mechanism in WFN law for consultation with residents of,
   or interest holders in, WFN lands who are not WFN members, on decisions that directly and significantly
   affect them.
        There are approximately 30 WFN laws in force. These include establishing an advisory council to
   address the representation of non-members living on WFN land, residential tenancy matters, the allotment
   of community lands, land use, including a land use plan and zoning regulations, family property, dealing
   with the division of property on marriage breakdown, and a number of administrative laws addressing the
   enforcement and adjudication of Westbank law.
        Federal and WFN law-making powers are concurrent on WFN lands. Conflict rules with respect to
   the application of WFN law and federal law are set out for each area of WFN jurisdiction. General
   provincial laws apply to WFN members and lands unless those laws deal with a subject matter covered by
   the Agreement, the enabling legislation or a Westbank law, or where there is conflict with the Agreement,
   the enabling legislation or a Westbank law.
        The WFN government and its public institutions are exempt from income and other taxes in the same
   manner as municipalities. For status Indians registered under the Indian Act, including WFN members,
   tax exemptions under the Indian Act continue to apply. The WFN government’s own-source revenue
   includes the collection of property and consumption taxes, and fees and other charges levied under WFN
   law.
        In addition to own-source revenue, the WFN government has an ongoing fiscal transfer agreement
   with Canada, renegotiated every five years, which sees the federal government providing funding for
   services comparable with other jurisdictions in the area and which considers the revenue-generating
   capacity of the WFN.


   First Nations Fiscal and Statistical Management
   On July 1, 2007, the First Nations Tax Commission (FNTC) officially began operations. The 10-member
   commission was established through the passage of the First Nations Fiscal and Statistical Management
   Act. It is the successor institution to the Indian Taxation Advisory Board, building on the board’s 18 years
   of experience and expertise.
       The FNTC is a major step forward for First Nations governments in the field of property taxation. It
   is mandated to help First Nations governments build and maintain fair and efficient First Nations property
   tax regimes, and to ensure those First Nations communities, and their taxpayers alike, receive the
   maximum benefit from those systems.
       In the past, the Indian Taxation Advisory Board (ITAB) provided many functions similar to
   provincial government bodies that regulate their local government property tax authorities. However,
   there were important differences. For example, the Board was advisory in nature, having only the power
   to make recommendations. The power to approve or not approve First Nations taxation laws remained
   with the minister. ITAB also faced many unique challenges because the First Nations property tax system
