                                                                                     APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS   217


operates within a legislative, legal, and policy context that is very different from local government tax
systems.
    The enhanced authority of the FNTC will allow property tax revenues to finance infrastructure more
effectively and reduce other barriers to economic development on First Nations lands. The FNTC will
operate as part of an overall system of fiscal governance for First Nations. It will be responsible for the
development and regulation of the First Nations property tax system. In carrying out this role, the FNTC
will work with First Nations, other First Nations institutions, and the federal, provincial, and local
governments. In 2008 the FNTC created the Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics to provide university
programs in tax administration and economic development for First Nation students, as well as undertake
economic development research for reserves. The first programs are being offered at Thompson Rivers
University in Kamloops.
    The FNTC will ensure the First Nations property tax system is administratively efficient, harmonized
with the rest of the country, and is fair to on-reserve taxpayers. To do this the FNTC will set
administrative standards, regulate matters pertaining to its property tax mandate, enforce these
regulations, mediate disputes, and act on behalf of the collective interest of First Nations tax
administrations.
    The First Nations Fiscal and Statistical Management Act created two other bodies:
    • First Nations Finance Authority (FNFA) provides a legal framework for issuing investment-grade
        First Nation bonds, and provides for long-term financing for First Nations infrastructure borrow-
        ing. The FNFA operates throughout Canada, but is modelled after B.C.’s Municipal Finance
        Authority.
    • First Nations Financial Management Board is an independent body that offers certification and
        intervention services in support of FNFA borrowing, and in support of FNTC policies relating to
        taxation and expenditures.


British Columbia Treaty Commission
Most First Nations in B.C. have not signed treaties40 and most of the province remains subject to
outstanding aboriginal land claims. From the late 1800s, the B.C. government rejected the validity of
claims, arguing that aboriginal rights or title to land were extinguished before B.C. became part of
Canada. If claims were found to exist, the province said they were entirely the federal government's
responsibility. In 1990, the B.C. government changed its position and in 1993, Canada, B.C., and First
Nations in the province established the British Columbia Treaty Commission (BCTC) to facilitate the
negotiation of modern treaties.41 The BCTC assesses the readiness of the parties to begin negotiation,
allocate negotiation funding to aboriginal groups, help obtain services to resolve disputes when requested,
and monitor and report on the status of negotiations.42
    Local governments have several interests in the outcome of the BCTC process. Issues of concern to
B.C. local governments include land ownership, governance, intergovernmental relations, dispute
resolution, service provision, infrastructure, land use planning and regulation, emergency services, bylaw
enforcement, economic development, loss of property tax revenue, the political representation of non-
aboriginal citizens residing on treaty settlement land, and First Nations regional district membership.
    Local governments in B.C. do not directly participate in the BCTC process, but they are recognized as
advisory members of the provincial negotiating teams under a memorandum of understanding between

40
     B.C. has two historic treaties: the Douglas Treaties on Vancouver Island and Treaty 8 in northeastern B.C.
41
     For more information on the B.C. Treaty Process see the BC Treaty Commission website.
42
     The Nisga’a Treaty was negotiated outside of the B.C. Treaty process.
