218    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   the province and the Union of British Columbia Municipalities. To assist in this role a number of treaty
   advisory committees (TACs) have been established to represent local government interests and advise the
   provincial negotiators on issues of concern to local governments. The TACs consist of municipal and
   electoral area elected officials and local government staff. The largest TAC is the Lower Mainland Treaty
   Advisory Committee, which has a thorough website detailing research and activities that support treaty
   negotiations in the area.
       In 2006, two agreements were signed through the BCTC negotiation process and were ratified by the
   participant First Nations, the Tsawwassen and Maa-nulth First Nations. Following ratification by First
   Nation residents, both received Canadian government Senate approval and Royal Assent June 26, 2008.


   Tsawwassen First Nation Final Agreement (2007)
  On July 25, 2007, B.C.’s first modern urban treaty negotiated through the BCTC process was ratified by
  the 358 Coast Salish members of the Tsawwassen First Nation (TFN). Their traditional and modern-day
  village is located on the Strait of Georgia, approximately 35 kilometres south of Vancouver, adjacent to
  the municipality of The Corporation of Delta (Delta). While the traditional territory covers approximately
  279,000 hectares, the Final Agreement land package consists of approximately 724 hectares located
  mainly between and around the B.C. Ferries terminal and Roberts Bank Superport.
       The TFN Final Agreement provides TFN with rights and law-making authorities for matters related to
  land, resources, and self-government. Following a transition period, the federal Indian Act will no longer
  apply to Tsawwassen First Nation, its land, or its members.
       Approximately 662 hectares of the treaty settlement land, known as the Tsawwassen lands, consist of
  former reserves (290 hectares) and provincial Crown land (372 hectares). The First Nation will own the
  Tsawwassen lands and subsurface resources, and will have law-making authorities over the lands. The
  remaining 62 hectares of land, known as the Boundary Bay and Fraser River parcels, will transfer to the
  TFN as fee-simple land. The First Nation will not own the subsurface resources of these fee-simple lands.
  These latter parcels will remain within the municipal boundaries of Delta.
       As of the treaty’s effective date, all Tsawwassen lands will be or continue to be registered in the B.C.
  Land Title Office in accordance with the Land Title Act.
       TFN will have rights of refusal for 80 years after the treaty takes effect to purchase approximately
  278 hectares of lands north of Tsawwassen lands (Brunswick Point lands) if the people currently leasing
  these lands choose not to buy them or decide to sell them. If TFN purchases land within the Brunswick
  Point lands within 50 years after the effective date of the treaty, TFN may add these lands to its treaty
  settlement lands.
       Following this 50-year period, TFN can add lands to its treaty settlement lands if it purchases the land
  from willing sellers, but the federal, provincial, and municipal governments must consent to the addition.
       While federal and provincial laws apply to the lands owned by TFN, the provincial agricultural land
  reserve (ALR) designation only applies to about 227 hectares consisting of former provincial Crown land
  and the Boundary Bay parcels. If they wish to remove this land from the ALR, TFN must apply to the
  Agricultural Land Commission (Agricultural Land Commission Act).
       The Highway 17 and Deltaport Way (Roberts Bank) corridors remain provincial land. Other roads
  that may become Tsawwassen lands are to remain open for public use.
       The Tsawwassen Government will hold elections at least every five years. While the government may
  include elements of traditional governance, such as hereditary chiefs, the majority of government
  representatives will be elected. This will be determined by the First Nation’s constitution, which will
  come into force on the treaty’s effective date.
