                                                                APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS         219


     The Tsawwassen First Nation Final Agreement sets out the First Nation government law-making
authorities and, in the event of a conflict, specifies whether federal, provincial, or TFN laws will prevail.
Areas of authority include the delivery of health services, education, adoptions and child protection,
social services, public works, culture, and emergency preparedness. In most of these areas of authority,
federal or provincial law prevails in the event of a conflict with Tsawwassen law.
     The TFN government can make laws with respect to land management and use, including planning,
zoning, and development. This includes authority over agriculture through land use planning and zoning.
Before a proposed law is made, residents of those lands who may be affected by the proposed laws are to
be consulted, similar in principle to that required of a municipality undertaking similar law making.
     The TFN government can also make laws with respect to the regulation, licensing, and prohibition of
businesses, traffic regulations on their roads, fire protection, and public works on Tsawwassen lands. The
British Columbia Building Code (BCBC) applies to buildings and structures on Tsawwassen lands. They
can make laws with respect to buildings and structures on Tsawwassen lands but cannot establish
standards that are additional to or different from the BCBC. Laws to conserve and protect culture and
language including regulating the access to heritage resources can also be made.
     On the effective date, the TFN government will become responsible for providing local services to all
residents on Tsawwassen lands.
     The TFN government will also become a member of the Greater Vancouver Regional District (Metro
Vancouver). The director, an elected member of the Tsawwassen First Nation government, will be
appointed to the board and have all the functions, powers, duties, and obligations of all Metro Vancouver
board directors. As a regional district member, TFN government will pay for regional services, e.g.,
administration and solid waste management, and access voluntary services.
     The TFN Final Agreement provides access to water from the Greater Vancouver Water District
(GVWD) on the same basis as other members of the water district. Costs for water provision are to be
negotiated by the TFN and the GVWD. Existing service agreements between the TFN and the municipal-
ity of Delta will remain in place and the two parties can enter into new agreements for the provision of
services.
     The TFN will have the ability to tax members and non-members within the Tsawwassen lands, in-
cluding the levying of property taxes. The Assessment Act and Assessment Authority Act will apply in
respect to establishing property taxes.
     Residents who reside on Tsawwassen lands who are not members of the First Nation will contribute
to the decision-making process of a Tsawwassen public institution if the activities of the institution,
including taxation matters, directly or significantly affect them.
     Under the TFN Final Agreement, tax exemptions for transaction taxes and other taxes under the In-
dian Act (section 87) will be phased out after eight and twelve years respectively of the treaty effective
date. Through a negotiated side agreement, B.C. will share 50 percent of provincial income tax and sales
tax revenue collected from TFN members after the tax exemptions have been phased out.
     On June 26, 2008, the TFN Final Agreement received Senate approval and Royal Assent in parlia-
ment.


Maa-nulth First Nation Final Agreement (2007)
In the summer and fall of 2007, the Maa-nulth Final Agreement was ratified by the Huu-ay-aht First
Nations, the Ka:’yu:’k’t’h’/Che:k’tles7et’h First Nations, the Toquaht Nation, the Uchucklesaht Tribe,
and the Ucluelet First Nation. These five nations comprise the Maa-nulth First Nations, whose communi-
ties are in the areas of Bamfield, Ucluelet, Alberni Inlet, and Kyuquot Sound on the west coast of
Vancouver Island. They have a combined population of approximately 2,000 people.
