220   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



       The Maa-nulth Final Agreement provides for the creation of five Maa-nulth governments, one for
  each of the five First Nations who are signatories to the treaty. Each Maa-nulth First Nation will have a
  constitution that provides for a government that is democratically and financially accountable to the Maa-
  nulth-aht and Maa-Nulth First Nation citizens. The constitution of each Maa-nulth First Nation will come
  into force on the effective date of the treaty.
       The Maa-nulth First Nations governments will hold elections at least every five years. At the discre-
  tion of each Maa-nulth First Nation, its constitution may provide for the appointment of Ha’wiih (Nuu-
  chah-nulth hereditary chiefs) into its government structure, but the majority of government representa-
  tives will be elected. This will be determined by the First Nation’s constitution.
       Maa-nulth First Nations continue to be aboriginal peoples and their rights under the Constitution Act,
  1982 are set out exhaustively in the Final Agreement for greater certainty. With the exception of
  determining Indian status, after a transition period the Indian Act will no longer apply to Maa-nulth First
  Nations, their lands, or members.
       When actions of a Maa-nulth government or public institution will directly and significantly affect
  individuals who are not Maa-nulth citizens, the Maa-nulth government or institution will have to consult
  with those individuals. The Maa-nulth must ensure that non-members have the ability to participate in
  discussions and vote on decisions that will affect them. The Maa-nulth First Nation governments will also
  be accountable to Canada and B.C. for financial transfers they receive from them.
       Maa-nulth First Nation lands do not form part of any municipality. Local government bylaws do not
  apply to Maa-nulth First Nation lands unless specific agreement has been reached between the applicable
  Maa-nulth First Nation and local government. The Final Agreement sets out the provisions under which
  the Maa-nulth First Nations will become members of the relevant regional district. After the effective date
  of the treaty, there will be a 10-year transition period during which the Maa-nulth First Nations are not
  required to become regional district members. However, at any time during the transition period a Maa-
  nulth First Nation may end the transition period and become members of the regional district.
       If it has not done so already, at the conclusion of the 10-year period each Maa-nulth First Nation will
  become a member of the applicable regional district. The First Nation director to the regional district
  Board will be an elected member of the First Nation government. The Huu-ay-aht First Nations, the
  Toquaht Nation, the Uchucklesaht Tribe, and the Ucluelet First Nation will join the Alberni-Clayoquot
  Regional District, while the Ka:’yu:’k’t’h’/Che:k’tles7et’h First Nations will become a member of the
  Strathcona Regional District.
       After the transition date, the Maa-nulth First Nations will participate in regional services, such as
  administration, solid waste management, and hospital financing of the applicable regional district. They
  may opt to participate in voluntary services, such as library, the 9-1-1 emergency service, the Tofino-
  Ucluelet Airport, and other services provided by the regional district.
       Each Maa-nulth First Nation may enter into land use planning protocols or service agreement con-
  tracts with the regional district. However, neither party is obligated to provide or pay for services unless
  both have specifically agreed to do so. The Province of British Columbia must consult with the Maa-nulth
  First Nations on any changes planned for the structure or boundary of regional districts that will directly
  and significantly affect the Maa-nulth First Nations.
       The Maa-nulth First Nations will have law-making authority over such matters as the Nuu-chah-nulth
  language and culture, governance and citizenship, lands, K–12 education, and adoption as set out in the
  Final Agreement. In these areas, Maa-nulth First Nations laws prevail over federal and provincial laws if
  there is a conflict between the two. The Maa-nulth First Nations may also make laws in areas including
  child care services, post-secondary education, health services and social development, public order,
  regulation of businesses, traffic and transportation, and enforcement of Maa-nulth laws. However, in
