                                                                 APPENDIX: FIRST NATIONS GOVERNMENTS          221


these areas the applicable federal or provincial law prevails over the Maa-nulth law if there is a conflict
between the two.
     Constraints on Maa-nulth First Nations’ legislative and other powers include:
     • Maa-nulth regulatory standards with respect to forests and range practices must meet or exceed
         provincial standards.
     • Federal and provincial laws concerning water continue to apply on Maa-nulth First Nation lands.
         Water reserves for each Maa-nulth First Nation will be established on the effective date of the
         treaty for domestic, industrial, and agricultural use. Certain streams will be set aside for potential
         hydro development by Maa-nulth First Nations. Water licences will continue to be issued by the
         British Columbia government.
     • B.C. retains jurisdiction for fisheries, though Maa-nulth First Nations may harvest fish for domes-
         tic purposes and regulate harvests and distribution of fish among members. A Joint Fisheries
         Committee, with one member appointed by Canada and each Maa-nulth First Nation, and by B.C.
         if that government chooses to do so, will receive annual fishing plans from each Maa-nulth First
         Nation and will manage matters relating to fisheries for the Maa-nulth First Nations.
     • Maa-nulth First Nations may harvest wildlife and migratory birds for food, social, and ceremonial
         purposes subject to conservation, public health, and public safety regulations and according to a
         harvest plan written by each Maa-nulth First Nation government.
     • Environmental assessment laws of Canada and B.C. will apply on Maa-nulth First Nation lands.
         However, no project will proceed on these lands without the consent of Maa-nulth First Nations.
     • Maa-nulth First Nations governments may not establish a court for arbitration of Maa-nulth First
         Nations laws. The Provincial Court of B.C. will hear prosecution of offences under Maa-nulth
         First Nations laws.
     The Final Agreement land package consists of a total of approximately 24,550 hectares of treaty
settlement lands, including former reserves, that will be held in fee-simple title by the Maa-nulth First
Nations. The Maa-nulth First Nations have identified certain parcels of land that are eligible to be
purchased by the Maa-nulth First Nations and added to the MFN lands within 15 years of the treaty
coming into effect. When these parcels are located within the boundaries of a municipality, the purchase
must be agreed to by the municipality. In general, Maa-nulth First Nation lands are not subject to
expropriation by the federal or provincial governments, though cases where this might occur are detailed
in the Final Agreement.
     Maa-nulth jurisdiction on treaty settlement land includes management, planning, zoning, and devel-
opment. Each Maa-nulth First Nation owns and manages all forest resources and most subsurface
resources on their lands and may determine the conditions for resource development and extraction. The
Final Agreement allows for access to Maa-nulth First Nations lands to be granted to officials of the
federal or provincial government as they carry out their duties, such as enforcing laws or responding to
emergencies. The general public has access to Maa-nulth First Nations lands for recreation and non-
commercial hunting and fishing. Public roads and highways on Maa-nulth First Nations lands remain
under British Columbia jurisdiction.
     Each Maa-nulth First Nation will have regulatory jurisdiction over the foreshore (Crown land below
the high-water mark) adjacent to its treaty settlement lands. The specific provisions for this jurisdiction
will be outlined in individual Foreshore Agreements entered into by each Maa-nulth First Nation and B.C.
The regulatory powers over the foreshore delegated by the province will include planning, zoning,
regulation of businesses, and nuisances.
     Each Maa-nulth First Nation government will have the ability to levy direct taxes (such as income
taxes) on its citizens within its treaty settlement lands. Current sales tax exemptions for status Indians
under the Indian Act will be phased out eight years after the effective date of the treaty, and other tax
