222    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   exemptions will cease twelve years after the effective date. Each Maa-nulth First Nation government will
   provide that non-Maa-nulth First Nation members who ordinarily reside on Maa-nulth First Nation lands,
   and registered owners of real property (or their representatives) who do not ordinarily reside on Maa-
   nulth First Nation lands, will have the ability to participate in discussions and vote on taxation decisions
   that directly and significantly affect them.
        Provincial legislation to ratify the Maa-nulth Final Agreement received Royal Assent on Novem-
   ber 29, 2007. The treaty will also require Royal Assent from the federal parliament before taking effect.
   At the time of publication, the timing of this process was not known.


   Tribal Councils
  In addition to individual First Nations providing services to members on reserve, groups of First Nations
  have formed associations, or tribal councils, to perform specific functions. Tribal councils are not a form
  of government and are not provided for in the Indian Act. They are generally established as societies
  under the provincial Society Act. Tribal councils consist of two or more First Nations that work coopera-
  tively on issues, such as cultural concerns, presenting positions to other governments and providing
  services on a larger and more efficient scale to members. In 2006, 29 tribal councils represented more
  than 150 First Nations bands in B.C. While not recognized as a First Nations government, tribal councils
  receive some government funding to operate.
      There is great diversity in the levels of authority and activities of tribal councils, depending on the
  needs and wishes of the First Nations that form them. Some, such as the Nuu-chah-nulth Tribal Council
  on Vancouver Island, can be described as a comprehensive tribal council concerned with a wide range of
  political, cultural, and service delivery matters. Others have more limited mandates, including a single
  focus such as the resolution of aboriginal land claims through the negotiation of treaties.
      Tribal councils will generally defer to individual member First Nations in land matters related to their
  traditional territory.


   Observations
  First Nations governments in B.C. are undergoing significant change as First Nations assume greater
  responsibilities for providing a broad range of services and look for opportunities to partner and promote
  economic development. As a result, many First Nations are developing contractual relationships with
  surrounding or adjacent municipalities and regional districts, and are participating formally and infor-
  mally in the local government system. It is expected that First Nations governments will have an
  increasingly important role in governance and service provision in the province.
