                                                                                       CHAPTER NOTES          223



Chapter Notes


F
       ull citations to references and some other documents are listed in the bibliography. Persons
       interviewed are listed in the acknowledgements. For the first two editions, the most important
       bibliographical sources of information were Crossley and Nykwist. For the third and fourth
editions, the most important sources include documents and other information posted on various websites.
The main websites are for the provincial government (www.gov.bc.ca and links) and the Union of British
Columbia Municipalities (www.civicnet.bc.ca and links). Virtually all municipalities, regional districts,
and organizations like the Island Trust maintain their own sites. We have found that searches, primarily in
Google, for specific information, legislation, or documents work very well.

Chapters 1 and 2
The approach taken in the book is based in a tradition that focuses on the incentives inherent within
institutional arrangements to balance benefits and costs in decision making and the nature of the good or
service desired by citizens. It is an integration of classical liberal economics and political science. The
classic article describing this perspective in political science is by Ostrom, Tiebout and Warren. The
article that introduces the term fiscal equivalence is Olson. Two useful introductions with direct applica-
tion to local government are Bish (1971) and Bish and Ostrom. Applications of this approach to a broad
number of local government issues is provided in Polycentricity and Local Public Economies, ed.
Michael D. McGinnis. A non-technical, more detailed explanation of the problems with applications to
local governments is included in Bish (1971). Other publications by Bish are referenced or available at
http://publicadmin.uvic.ca/cpss/lgi/publish.htm. Examples of different kinds of public services are also
provided in subsequent chapters. Information sources for the overviews of local governments, provincial
ministries, agencies, and statutory officers include annual reports, published statistics, and other docu-
ments on websites.

Chapters 3 and 4
The history of municipal government in British Columbia is discussed by Bracewell, Ormsby, and
William Burns in pages 623–640 of Scholefield. The B.C. Royal Commission reports of 1912 and 1938
and the 1947 Goldenberg report are also excellent sources of historical information. Background on
regional districts is contained in Brown, Collier, Tennant, and Zirnhelt, Ministry of Municipal Affairs
(1978) and Bish (1999c). The main sources of information about municipalities and regional districts are
the municipal affairs ministry, the individual local governments, and interviews. Smith and Stewart also
analyze the problems of the electoral system in Vancouver. Indian reserves in municipalities are discussed
in Bish (1987); Cassidy and Bish; and Bish, Clemens and Topham. The discussion of amalgamation is
largely based on sources cited in Bish (2001) and Sancton. The amalgamation issue in the Capital
Regional District is examined in Bish (1999a, b and d). Most current information, comes from websites
for the governments described.

Chapter 5
The municipal affairs ministry is a primary source of information about the Sechelt Indian District,
improvement districts, local community commissions, the Islands Trust, and local areas. The Islands
Trust provided updated statistical data. A discussion of the Sechelt Indian District is included in Cassidy
and Bish. Updating of other information came from websites and directly from the ministry responsible
for those governments.
