224    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BRITISH COLUMBIA



   Chapters 6–8
   The descriptions and analysis in Chapters 6 through 8 were done by Bish, McDavid and Eric Clemens
   and is based on research on these topics since the 1970s and 1980s. Many of the reports were for clients
   and are not public. Others are published and listed in the bibliography. Specific information on local
   government arrangements in British Columbia came initially from many student papers, but has since
   been updated through websites and consultation with local and ministry officials. Documents in which
   concepts are discussed include Advisory Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR); McGinnis;
   and Bish (1986; 1999a).
        Alternative approaches to service production, including contracting, are the focus of many articles by
   McDavid and his co-authors. More than a dozen of these studies are listed in the bibliography, and they
   cover policing, fire protection, recycling, and solid waste collection and disposal.
        Information on the production of local government services in the United States is presented in Os-
   trom, Bish, and Ostrom. U.S. police services are discussed in Ostrom, Parks, and Whitaker; Parks; and
   several articles in McGinnis. We relied heavily on interviews and comments from the officials listed in
   the acknowledgements for the information on current arrangements in British Columbia.
        Evaluation of services and programs is discussed in McDavid and Hawthorn (2006). This textbook
   includes chapters on both program evaluation and performance measurement, and a separate chapter on
   cost-benefit analysis that describes the key steps in conducting a cost-benefit study of project or program
   alternatives. A more recent guide to policy and program evaluation that is intended for persons who do
   not have background in evaluation is McDavid and Huse’s Policy Evaluation Guide for the BC Govern-
   ment (2008). It is available from the authors and includes two modules that offer additional web-based
   sources on a wide range of evaluation topics, including program evaluation, cost-benefit analysis, and
   performance measurement.

   Chapter 9
   The previous three editions relied heavily on student papers and interviews. For this edition, websites, BC
   government statistical sources, and a new set of interviews were conducted.

   Chapter 10
  Land use planning, zoning, and subdivision policies and practices are covered in a variety of publications
  from the municipal affairs ministry and local governments. The Vancouver area regional planning history
  is presented in Gerald Hodge and Ira M. Robinson’s Planning Canadian Regions (2002). Other docu-
  ments relevant to this chapter include Bish and Nourse; Goldberg and Horwood; Kitchen; and Martin.
  Buholzer’s British Columbia Planning Law and Practice looseleaf seems to be the reference for planners.

   Chapter 11
   Sources of information on local government labour relations include the direct contact with the variety of
   unions involved, not all of which had information on the number of their members who worked for local
   governments, employers and employer bargaining associations.

   Chapter 12
   Any public finance text covers issues of taxation. The Ministry of Municipal Affairs, the Municipal
   Finance Authority, and individual local governments are the main sources of information on municipal,
   regional district, and improvement district finances. Indian reserve taxation issues are analyzed in Bish
   (1987) and Bish, Clemens, and Topham. The business-residential property tax relationship studies are all
   cited in the text and may be found in the bibliography. User charges are examined in Kitchen (2002),
   Galambos and Schreiber; and Sproule-Jones and White.
