Committee Report pg. 2
Supporting CAWA also aligns with Action 7.1.1 of Charlottetown's Climate Action Plan:

"Work with watershed groups, local non-profits, and Indigenous communities to increase capacity for effectively
managing watersheds, protecting water courses, water quality, and aquatic ecosystems"

Highlights from 2025 field season:
 - Assisted City staff with tree planting in Meadow Park, Windsor Park, Hermitage Creek, Victoria Park, and at
 the West Royalty Community Centre.
 - 4,291 kg of invasive plants removed, including bittersweet nightshade, small balsam, purple loosestrife and
 glossy buckthorn.
 - 105 kg of garbage removed from in-stream areas, stream banks, and shorelines.
 - Water quality monitoring to assess the health of the watersheds.
 - Stream restoration projects across the watershed to improve habitat, stabilize banks, and support overall
 stream health.
 - Maintenance on the rain garden at Spring Park Elementary School, the QEH living shoreline site and the
 pollinator garden at the West Royalty Community Centre.
 - Invasive species removal and tree maintenance along the Wright's Creek trail.
 - Community outreach and educational workshops, involved in the: Business Tree Challenge, Arbor Day field
 trip, pollinator garden planting, buckthorn bash/invasive species removal, bio-blitz events, National Tree
 Day celebration, TD Tree Day, etc..

Council or Committee History:
N/A

Financial Implications:
$20,000 has been approved for annual watershed grants through the E&S 2026-2027 operating budget. In previous
years, this amount was divided into two $10,000 grants for the Ellen's Creek Watershed Group and the Wright's
Creek Watershed Environmental Committee. This request of Council will not have budget impacts but would adjust
the way we pay for watershed group support.

Public Engagement and Communication:
The CAWA are involved in many community events in partnership with the City and have their own public
engagement (events, social media, brochures, etc). The City is recognized as a funder following the City's guidelines.

Legislative Authority:
Municipal Government Act - Part 7 on Municipal Jurisdiction.

Strategic Alignment:
Guiding Principles: Collaborating, Accountable
Commitments: Sustainability, Collaboration and partnership, Growth, Commitment to ongoing community
engagement.
Pillars: Community-Building and Placemaking, Infrastructure and the Environment
Reviewed By:
Manager Director/CAO
JCG March 27, 2026 RDM April 1, 2026
Committee Recommendation: (if differing from staff)
