Public Works Committee 3 April 22, 2026

 - Existing contract language is outdated and staff plan to modernize wording to include
 clearer expectations and responsibilities, including repair of damage incurred during
 operations.
 - There was a significant discussion around whether contracts should automatically renew
 or be retendered after every 5-year term. Councillor Muttart emphasized the importance
 of fairness, transparency and competitive bidding arguing contracts should return to
 tender after five years instead of being repeatedly renewed at staff discretion.
 o PWM Gashi indicated that jurisdictional scans of other provinces and
 municipalities indicate that some offer 10 Year contracts with their contractors to
 ensure contractors have up to date equipment and staff to complete the work.
 And noted that there is a fine line at 5 years, 10 years or somewhere in between
 where the public is going to get the best value for money.
 o Winter contracts are operational and costs vary annually depending on weather
 severity.
 - Mayor Brown raised concerns about plow damage to lawns and boulevards, department
 staff indicated that current contracts recognize that minor damage is expected, but
 contractors are responsible for significant damage, as determined by City staff.
 o Repairs may be completed by the contractor or city crews with costs recovered
 from contractor holdbacks.
 o The current system is described as a shared approach, which has caused some
 confusion with residents.
 o Councillor McAleer stated that he notifies department staff of damage to a lawn
 when residents reach out to him, his request is added to the work orders and
 repairs are completed.
 Status
 - Staff confirmed that any renewal or tender decision will come back to council as a
 recommendation.
 - Staff committed to clarifying damage responsibility and repair standards in future
 contracts.
 - Staff will consult with Finance and return to council with a clear recommendation on
 whether to:
 o Renew the Priority Route contract, or
 o Proceed to open tender.

d) Public Works Update - Capital and Operational Summaries
Mayor Brown initiated a discussion on planned upgrades at the West Royalty Community
Center, noting that MacLean Construction was the low bidder awarded the tender. He indicated
that facility has long needed improvements, and is supportive of the current work moving
ahead but he raised a concern about the lack of accessibility and a reliable elevator as the
existing lift is often inoperable or difficult to use. He asked staff to consider installing a proper
elevator if not this year then next year.

7. Introduction of New Business
There was no new business discussed.

8. Adjournment
Moved by Councillor Muttart and seconded by Councillor McAleer that the meeting be adjourned.
Carried (3-0). The meeting concluded at 1:10 PM.
