HORSEDRAWN AND RICKSHAW VEHICLE BYLAW

Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Bylaw Proposed Amendments

 change in character of a policy for the material risk, the amount of the coverage
 provided for or the risk covered by it.

4.8, The Operator shall register each Vehicle according to the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I.
 1974, Cap. H-6. Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap H-5.

5.9. The Operator shall not allow the Vehicle to be driven by anyone who does not hold a
 driver's permit provided for in this Bylaw and also according to the requirements of the
 Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. H-6. Should the Operator drive the Vehicle
 himself, he shall also hold such a permit. Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap H-5.

6.10. It shall be prohibited to drive a Horsedrawn Vehicle without the driver's permit provided for
 in this Bylaw also in accordance with the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1974, Cap. H-6.
 Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap H-5.

7.11. The permit referred to at Section 6 10 above shall be issued to an applicant meeting the
 following requirements:

 (a) Be of age to drive a Vehicle as defined by the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1974,
 Cap. H-6 Highway Traffic Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap H-5 and be of good
 character;

 (b) Be able to show that he they can harness and unharness a horse properly;

 (c) Be able to show that he they can drive a Horsedrawn Vehicle reasonably well;

 (d) Has successfully passed a written and/or verbal questionnaire prepared by the Chief
 of Police of the City of Charlottetown on the Bylaw to Regulate the Traffic in the
 City of Charlottetown and the Highway Traffic Act; and

 (e) Has successfully passed a written and/or oral questionnaire prepared by the Chief of
 Police having to do with tourist information in the City of Charlottetown.

8.12. Any driver who violates the provisions of this Bylaw twice in one year and who was found
 guilty of such offence shall lose the right to have this permit renewed for one year following
 the year in which such violation occurred.

 Should any one of the two violations contravene 9 subsection 13 (c) hereof, the loss of the
 right to have the permit renewed shall extend for a period of two (2) consecutive years
 following the year in which the violations occurred.

City of Charlottetown Page 4 of 16
