City of Charlottetown Report No: PH-2026-05-05

 Committee Report Date: May 5, 2026
Directed to Council through the following Attachments:
Committee: Planning and Heritage Committee . Pedestrian Mall Bylaw
Reporting Department: DRAFT - Pedestrian Mall Agreement
Planning and Heritage Department
Other Associated Departments:
None
Prepared by:
Brad Vince, Planner II & Heritage Officer
Report Title:
Amendment to the Pedestrian Mall Bylaw Agreement Operating Hours
Report Purpose:
To request that the Planning and Heritage Committee consider extending the closing time of the
Victoria Row Pedestrian Mall operations to 1:00 AM on a permanent basis.
Staff Recommendation:
That the Planning and Heritage Committee recommends that Council approve the permanent
extension of the Pedestrian Mall closing time to 1:00 a.m.
Report Details:

Background

The Victoria Row Merchants Association requested a change to the operating hours in the Pedestrian
Mall Agreement with the City of Charlottetown. They asked to extend patio hours during the season by
one hour, from 8:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.-1:00 a.m.

The request was made to help businesses manage the impacts of nearby construction and closures on
Victoria Row related to work at the Confederation Centre of the Arts. Merchants indicated that the
additional hour could help offset some of their losses.

In 2025, the Planning and Heritage Committee reviewed the request and recommended that Council
approve the extended hours on a one-season pilot basis. The plan was to review the results at the end
of the 2025 summer season or early in 2026, and consider next steps, including possible public
engagement.

Analysis and Conclusion

Following Council's temporary approval, the City of Charlottetown undertook public and stakeholder
engagement as part of the ongoing Patio Bylaw review process. We did receive feedback that patios
should not host live music, as it could create significant noise concerns for nearby residents. However,
no objections were received regarding the proposed 1:00 a.m. closing time, that is aligned to the
temporary approval. feedback from operators or nearby residents related to closing times.
