NUISANCE BYLAW
Amendment Summary Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st Reading 2nd Reading 3rd Reading

 nothing Add new subsection 2.10 (c) under "Excessive Noise" as follows:
 2.10 (c) The provisions of paragraph (a) do not apply to equipment
 utilized for snow removal.
 (Now re-numbered as Section 2.12)
 Snow Delete "Snow" section number 12
 12. Any person who puts or places or causes to be
 placed any quantity of snow or ice from any source on
 any of the streets, squares, lanes sidewalks, wharves,
 bridges or thoroughfares to the river so as to form or
 cause an obstruction or nuisance to vehicular or
 pedestrian traffic or another person is guilty of an
 offence.
 Unwieldy Loads Delete last line of "Unwieldy Loads" section which includes the words:
 13. Any person who draws or causes to be drawn any "and shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in this Bylaw, be liable
 unwieldy or heavy thing upon any of the streets of the for the amount of damage caused."
 City without having adequate and ready means of
 safety guiding the same, or who drives or causes to
 be driven anything in the streets which may be
 reasonably capable of thereby injuring the said
 streets, is guilty of an offence and shall, in addition to
 the penalties provided for in this Bylaw, be liable for
 the amount of damage caused.
 14. Any person who moves or causes to be moved Delete "Moving Buildings" section number 14 and replace with the
 any building on any of the streets or squares of the following:
 City without written permission of the Mayor or City 2.13 The moving of buildings within the City shall be done only
 Engineer or other official responsible for same is guilty under the written authority of the Chief Administrative Officer or
 of an offence. Any person in so moving or causing to his designate. Written authority shall include the course to be
 be moved any such building or any moving apparatus followed and the place occupied overnight.
 to stand on any street at night without being lighted (a) Any person who moves or causes to be moved any building on
 sufficiently to prevent danger to passengers and traffic any of the streets or squares of the City without written
 generally is guilty of an offence. Such moving shall be permission, is guilty of an offence.
 subject to the order of the City Engineer in regard to (b) Any person in so moving or causing to be moved any such
 the course followed and place occupied overnight and building or any moving apparatus to stand on any street at night
 both owner and mover of such building shall be jointly without being sufficiently lit to prevent danger to passengers and
 and severally liable to repair all damage done to the traffic generally is guilty of an offence.
 streets by such moving. (Now re-numbered as Section 2.16)

 16
