Committee Report pg. 2
Report Details:
The request for rezoning was submitted by applicant representing the owners on April 15, 2026 to the City of
Charlottetown Planning & Heritage Department in pursuit of changing the zoning for the property identified as 307
Patterson Drive (PID# 676585) from (R-2) to (C-1) in order to harmonize said zoning with that of the abutting parcel
identified as 311 Patterson Drive (also PID# 676585) across the extents of both combined parcels which contain an
existing 1-storey commercial building (convenience store) having an exterior footprint of approximately 172 square
metres (1,851 square feet).

Development Context:
The subject property is an interior residential lot that is developed with a portion of an existing 1-storey
neighbourhood commercial building (convenience store) which continues onto an abutting property to the west
identified as 311 Patterson Drive (PID# 676585). Of the 172 square metre (1,851 square feet) footprint of the existing
commercial building, approximately 49% of its coverage is present on the property subject to the proposed rezoning
(307 Patterson Drive) while the remaining 51% of its coverage is present across on the abutting property to the west
at 311 Patterson Drive.
The property is bounded to the east by residential property also in the (R-2) Zone containing an existing single-
detached dwelling (303 Patterson Drive) and to the north by residential property in the (R-3) Zone containing a set of
sixteen (16) townhouses arranged in 3 separate physical blocks (3 to 35 Westridge Crescent). Bounding also to the
north are City-owned lands containing a City community park in the Open Space (OS) Zone and to the south the
property fronts onto Patterson Drive (see Attachments A & B).

LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS:
Notification
If the proposed rezoning is approved to proceed to the public consultation phase, the Planning & Heritage Department
will notify the public of the future public meeting date in accordance with Section 3.10.4 of the Zoning & Development
Bylaw.

ANALYSIS:
As per Section 3.10.3 of the Zoning & Development Bylaw, before amending the zoning of any parcel of land, Council
shall conduct a public meeting to receive the views and opinions of the public and the applicant. Council may, for
reasons that are in the best interests of the City, reject a proposed zoning amendment without public notice and
without referral to a public meeting, but if an application goes to a public meeting, then Council shall determine the
disposition of the application and the applicant may not be allowed to withdraw the application after the public
meeting.

Planning staff are of the opinion that the project has merit with sufficient information provided to date by the
applicant to allow for consideration of the proposed rezoning via the public meeting process with Council.

CONCLUSION:
The Planning & Heritage Department encourages Planning Board to recommend to Council to approve the request to
proceed to public consultation concerning a proposed rezoning of the subject property identified as 307 Patterson
Drive (PID# 676585) from the Low Density Residential (R-2) Zone to the Business Office Commercial (C-1) Zone in
order to harmonize the existing zoning for two parcels of land under the same PID number (311 and 307 Patterson
Drive) containing an existing 1-storey commercial building (convenience store).
