Public Works Committee 2 April 22, 2026

6. Reports/Discussions

a) Parking Strategy
The Chair asked the Public Works Traffic Engineer (PWTE) to speak to the report. PWTE Taweel
spoke to the report. Key points from the discussion as follows:
 - A major concern was raised by Chair Tweel that residents not just business owners are
 fully engaged before changes affect neighbourhood streets. PWTE Taweel confirmed
 that this is only a study on the parking strategy as a whole, and not an approval of
 projects at this time. If and when a change is to be implemented that will affect local
 residents the department will communicate appropriately with the relevant groups of
 people, as per the departments typical practice with any project.
 - Consultants from WSP began presenting. However due to technical/audio issues the
 presentation was deferred.

Chair Tweel requested a deferral of the report due to technical communication issues with the
consultants presentation and time constraints.

b) 70 Kent Street Main Entrance Relocation
The Chair asked the Public Works Manager (PWM) to speak to the report. PWM Gashi spoke to
the report. Key points from the discussion as follows:
 - A competitive tender was issued on February 13, 2026 and Closed on March 16, 2026
 with five (5) bids received. The department recommends awarding the contract to
 MacLean Construction who are the lowest bidder at $269,300.00 + taxes.
 - The original budget was for $200,000 so the report included a proposed budget transfer
 from the municipal buildings capital maintenance budget to cover the shortfall.
 - The work required is driven by accessibility deficiencies and aging infrastructure.
 - Chair Tweel requested clarification about the history of the building including:
 o How and when it was acquired by the City
 o The purchase terms
 o Total spending to date on all repairs and maintenance
 Staff advised that additional background information and financial history will be
 provided prior to the council meeting.

Moved by Councillor Muttart and seconded by Mayor Brown that "70 Kent Street Main Entrance
Relocation" be forwarded to Council for approval. Carried (3-0)

c) Winter Street Services Update
The chair asked the Public Works Manager (PWM) to speak to the report. PWM Gashi spoke to
the report. Key points from the discussion as follows:
 - The city has three contractor sections that are not maintained by City union crews.
 o Priority Routes
 o Northeast Section
 o Northwest Section
 - Priority Routes were taken over from the Province in 2022 under a 5 year contract with
 an option to renew for an additional five years. This renewal option is under review for
 the 2027-2028 season with a notice of intent to renew by April 30, 2026
 - The Northeast and Northwest Routes are not eligible for renewal under their existing
 contracts and will need to be put back out for competitive tender later this summer.
 - Staff use GIS mapping for contractor routes to better reflect current road networks.
