Planning & Heritage Committee Meeting
Tuesday, May 5, 2026
Page 2 of 3

 the request intended to help offset impacts from construction related to the
 Confederation Centre of the Arts.
 o Bradley also pointed out that Council approved extended hours as a one-season
 pilot with review planned for early 2026.
 o It was said that consultation and stakeholder engagement was conducted through
 the patio bylaw review process and no objections received regarding the extended
 1:00 a.m. closing time and no concerns have been raised by businesses, operators,
 or nearby residents since implementation.
 o It was noted that extended hours have had a positive impact on Victoria Row
 businesses and based on absence of opposition and positive outcomes,
 department supports making hours permanent.
 o Bradley recommended for committee to approve operating hours of 8:00 a.m.-
 1:00 a.m. during patio season and amend the pedestrian mall agreement
 accordingly.

Discussion:

 - It was asked whether other patios in the city currently operate until 1:00 a.m. and staff
 indicated that most other patios are currently permitted until 12:00 a.m. and are being
 reviewed through the patio bylaw review and update processes.

 - It was noted there is an inconsistency between Victoria Row (1:00 a.m.) and other patios
 closing at midnight and suggested a potential pilot for other patios and staff clarified that
 some businesses may close earlier based on their own operating hours, even if permitted
 later.

 - Committee members asked about specific patio closing times, noting some appear to close
 earlier and staff explained that Victoria Row operates as a pedestrian mall with consistent
 patio hours, unlike individual businesses.

 - There was some discussion on the noted differences between patios on private property
 and those within the public right-of-way and committee agreed that broader patio hour
 changes should be addressed through the ongoing patio bylaw review and update
 processes.

MOTION:

Moved by Mayor Brown and seconded by Councillor McCabe that the Planning and
Heritage Committee recommend that Council approve the Victoria Row Pedestrian
Mall operating hours to be 8:00 AM - 1:00AM on a permanent basis during patio
season and adjust the Pedestrian Mall Bylaw Agreement to reflect this change.

 CARRIED
 (2-0)

DRAFT UNTIL REVIEWED BY COMMITTEE
