Planning Board Meeting
Tuesday, May 5, 2026
Page 9 of 11

Services, could help inform public safety considerations; however, such input is not always part
of the standard review process. It was suggested that additional consultation with Police Services
may assist in addressing outstanding concerns. It was emphasized that there is a recognized need
for supportive and transitional housing within the community and that such developments align
with the objectives of the Official Plan. It was also noted that achieving a balance between
supporting vulnerable populations and maintaining community confidence remains an important
consideration. It was then stated that a motion was brought forward to defer the application in
order to allow for further discussion with the Province regarding additional safety measures,
including the incorporation of enhanced surveillance systems. The motion was seconded, and
further discussion took place prior to the vote being called. It was noted that members expressed
support for achieving an appropriate balance between housing needs and community safety,
recognizing both the importance of the proposed use and the concerns raised by residents. It
was asked whether the proposed housing would accommodate all genders, and it was generally
understood that it would be an inclusive arrangement.

MOTION:

Moved by Mayor Brown and seconded by Councillor McCabe that Planning Board
recommend that Council defer the request for a site-specific amendment to the
existing Downtown Mixed Use Neighbourhood (DMUN) Zone that applies to the
subject property identified as 147 Hillsborough Street (PID# 342907) to allow for the
existing 3-storey structure to be repurposed as a transitional housing facility having
11 beds for residents.

 CARRIED
 (6-1)
 Bobby Kenny Opposed

 c) Queuing Space / Drive-thru:
 1. Unaddressed Property - University Avenue (PID# 387761)
 David Gundrum, Manager of Development Planning

Property Information: Shopping Centre Commercial (C-3) Zone
Staff Presenter: David Gundrum, Manager Planning Development
Applicant: Cain Arsenualt c/o Killam Investments
Reference: Planning Board Meeting Package

Request:

This is a request to accept the traffic study prepared by EXP Group to permit a drive-thru
MacDonald's restaurant at the subject location.
Summary:

David Gundrum presented the proposal is for a request concerning the unaddressed property on
University Avenue (PID# 387761) to permit a new McDonald's drive-thru including a queuing and

DRAFT UNTIL REVIEWED BY COMMITTEE
