Pedestrian Mall Bylaw Amended 22-Jul-2025

7. General
 7.1. No person shall do anything to destroy, injure, deface or damage any tree, shrub, flower,
 grass or other natural growing thing placed on the pedestrian mall or any portion thereof.

 7.2. No person shall deface, damage, destroy or remove any device, object, or decoration placed
 on the pedestrian mall by or with the permission of the City.

 7.3. Unless otherwise directed or permitted to do so by the City, no person shall remove from
 the pedestrian mall any object belonging to the City whether attached to the pedestrian
 mall or otherwise, and which has been placed there by the City.

 7.4. No person shall place, deposit, discard, leave, throw or scatter on any part of the pedestrian
 mall any bottles, dirt, filth, litter or rubbish of any kind whatsoever except in a receptacle
 provided for such purpose.

 7.5. Except as permitted by this Bylaw or any other Bylaw of the City, no person shall obstruct or
 cause any obstruction to be placed upon any emergency or fire lane established and
 maintained on the pedestrian mall lane established by the City. Any person who obstructs
 or causes an obstruction on any such emergency or fire lane shall forthwith upon notice
 remove it and, if the obstruction is not so removed, and peace officer appointed by the City
 may cause it to be removed at the expense of the person and maintained on the pedestrian
 mall by the City. Any person who obstructs or causes an obstruction shall forthwith upon
 notice remove it and, if the obstruction is not so removed, any peace officer appointed by
 the City may cause it to be removed at the expense of the person causing the obstruction.

8. Penalties
 8.1. A person who contravenes any provision of this Bylaw is liable upon summary convection to
 a fine not exceeding $500.00 and not less than $200.00 and in default of payment to a
 reasonable imprisonment or term not exceeding 30 days until the fine imposed and costs
 have been paid.

 8.2. In lieu of or in addition to the penalty imposed by Section 8.1 any person contravening a
 provision of this Bylaw may be required by a police officer appointed by the City to
 forthwith leave the pedestrian mall and to cease contravening this Bylaw or both.

 8.3. The provisions of the City's Enforcement and Summary Proceedings Bylaw #2024-ESP-01, or
 any successor bylaw, apply to the enforcement of this Bylaw.

 "This document is an office consolidation of this Bylaw (amending bylaw adopted 22-July-2025).
 It is intended for information and reference purposes only. This document is not the
 official version of the Bylaw. Where accuracy is critical, please consult official sources. If you
 find any errors or omissions in this consolidation, please contact the Procedure & Records Coordinator."

City of Charlottetown 4
