4. To designate no more than three (3) individuals to serve as spokespersons for
all concerns.

5. To maintain business liability insurance in amounts and with coverage deemed
satisfactory by the City for all merchants conducting business or operating on the street
or sidewalk (e.g., decks, tables, and chairs), as well as for any street entertainment
activities (e.g., musical performances) taking place on the street and/or on the stage or
bandstand.

 T
6. The Owner shall at all times indemnify and save harmless the City from and against
all claims, demands, loss, costs, damages, actions, suits or other proceedings by
whomever made, sustained, brought or prosecuted to the extent that the foregoing are
based upon, occasioned by or attributable to anything done or omitted by the Owner,
his servants or his agents or employees in the fulfillment of any of its obligations under
this Agreement.

 AF
7. To listen to all suggestions and recommendations from Council to make the Mall
a better place to conduct business for pedestrians.

8. To construct a seasonal bandstand on Richmond Street in accordance with the
plans submitted to the City, and to ensure its removal no later than November 1st of
each year.

9. To permit bands or entertainment only until 10:00 PM on any given night.

10. To operate daily between the hours of 8:00 AM and 1:00 AM.

11. To ensure unobstructed access for emergency vehicles at all times.

12. As the street is closed to regular traffic and open to pedestrians, merchants agree to
DR
limit vehicle access to only essential local deliveries and activities, in order to maintain a
safe pedestrian environment. Major deliveries should be routed via Sydney Street for
businesses located on this street, or alternatively, small items may be delivered by
parking outside the barriers and transporting them on foot.

13. Proper crowd control must be exercised for other activities on the street that
are sanctioned by the City Council from time to time.

14. Ensure that all businesses maintain a minimum five (5) foot-wide straight and
unobstructed pathway on the sidewalk to accommodate pedestrian traffic. This clear
zone must also remain free of sandwich board signage or any other obstructions.
