Committee Report pg. 2
Add Section to Nuisance Bylaw to include:

 - No person shall feed wild animals in any place in such a manner or to such an extent that doing so causes or
 may cause an unreasonable interference with another persons' use and enjoyment of his or her property, or
 of a public place.
 - No person shall feed any wildlife or wild animal on private or public property.
 - No person shall place any food, pet food or feeding device on any property in a manner that attracts wildlife
 or a wild animal.
 - No person shall feed any bird other than a Songbird or Hummingbird.
 - No person shall feed a Songbird unless the following feeding requirements are met by the person:
 - The person has the permission of the owner or occupant of the property where the feeding takes place; and
 - The food intended for the Songbird is placed in a bird feeding device that is sufficiently above grade as to
 not attract or be accessible by wildlife or wild animals;
 - Bird feeding practices do not attract large flocks of homing birds such as wild, feral or domestic pigeons; and
 - Spillage of food upon the ground is removed by the person or property owner or occupier forthwith and
 disposed of in such a manner that it does not attract wildlife, wild animals, feral or stray domestic animals;
 and,
 - The process of feeding does not interfere with the normal use or enjoyment of any other property.
 - Every property shall be kept free of rodents, vermin, insects and other pests. No owner or occupier of
 property shall permit an accumulation of dog feces or allow offensive odours coming from compost, or food
 to be emitted or escape from the property that could attract wildlife, wild animals, rodents, vermin, insects
 or other pests to the property.

Exemptions
The following circumstances are to be exempt and allow the following:
 a. Feeding of Songbirds and bird feeders on private property, where the property owner
 b. has given permission to do so and in accordance with this by-law.
 c. Leaving food as bait to trap a nuisance animal
 d. Feeding of a managed colony of stray or feral cats
 e. Feeding as part of a research program undertaken by a university, college or similarly
 f. provincially or federally recognized research institution

Any person who contravenes any provision of this Bylaw is punishable on summary conviction by a fine of not less
than $200.00 and not more than $1000.00

Other amendments to include, assigning a bylaw #, general housekeeping edits to improve clarity, consistency,
reference to the Municipal Government Act and any other relevant Acts or Regulations.

Option 2: Adopt completely new Wildlife Feeding Bylaw

Council or Committee History:
Bylaw last amended September 11, 2017

Financial Implications:
N/A

Public Engagement and Communication:
N/A
