HORSEDRAWN AND RICKSHAW VEHICLE BYLAW

Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Bylaw Proposed Amendments

 commercially for the conveyance of passengers, such vehicle also referred to as
 a cycle rickshaw.
 f) 'Police Officer' means and includes any Constable, Cadet, Inspector, Special
 Constable or Police Commissionaire employed or appointed for the
 preservation and maintenance of the public peace and order or for the service
 or execution of judicial process.
 g) 'Power-Assisted Bicycles' means a vehicle that:
 i. is equipped with an electric motor or a motor having a piston
 displacement not greater than 50 cubic centimeters,
 ii. is not capable of achieving a speed greater than 50 kilometers per hour
 on level ground when driven by a person weighing 60 kilograms, and
 iii. has no more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
 h) 'Street' means includes roads and highways. The terms street, road and
 highway are used interchangeably and refer to the Rights-of-way used for
 vehicular traffic.
 i) 'Vehicle' means a device in, upon, or by which a person or thing may be
 transported or drawn.
Interpretation

1. In this Bylaw:
PART I - HORSEDRAWN VEHICLES

5. Interpretation
 (a) "Operator" shall designate anyone who operates a business involving the
 conveyance of passengers in Horsedrawn Vehicles other than the driver of such a
 Vehicle;

 (b) "Station" shall designate a space reserved for the parking of Horsedrawn Vehicles;

 (c) "Horsedrawn Vehicles" or "Vehicle" shall designate a Vehicle drawn by one or
 several horses and used commercially for the conveyance of passengers, such
 Vehicle being commonly referred to as a calash, a hackney, carriage, a victoria, a
 sleigh, or a cariole.

Permits

2.6. The Operator shall not operate his their business without holding permits for horse and for a
 Horsedrawn Vehicle as provided for under this Bylaw.

3.7. The permits referred to in Section 2 6 above shall be issued subject to the following
 conditions:

 (a) In order to ensure the safety of passengers, the Vehicle:

City of Charlottetown Page 2 of 16
