City of Charlottetown Report No: FIN-09-2026

 Committee Report
 Date: May 06, 2026

Directed to Council through the following Committee: Attachments:
Finance, Audit, Tendering & Administration - Financial Report as of March 31st 2026

Reporting Department: Finance

Other Associated Departments: None

Prepared by:
 - Amy McQuillan, Manager of Finance

Report Title:
 - Update to Committee on Operational Matters of Interest

Report Purpose:
 - To provide members of the Finance, Audit, Tendering and Administration Committee with information
 regarding operational matters believed to be of interest to members of the committee.

Staff Recommendation:
 No recommendation. This report is for information purposes only.

Report Details:

Budget Feedback Survey:
We are looking to gather some post-mortem information from the leaders on the most recent budget process. We
want to make this process as streamlined and efficient as possible with plenty of advanced communication on timelines
and expectations. This will be executed through the CAO taskforce, and the survey has been compiled with plans to
send it out via SurveyMonkey this week. There will be a separate survey sent out later which will compile information
on the accounting systems themselves, so we have a list of criteria when searching for a new system.

Training on GP/E-Requestor
Training was scheduled last week for Isaac and Amy to address the current shortfall in our reporting from GP. We are
hoping to be able to provide regular reporting for the leaders in all departments for expenses and capital. Next will be
training on E-Requestor and training for leaders in GP if anyone is interested.

Finance Staffing
The finance team has still not hired to replace the Senior Accountant position. We are reviewing the current profiles
of all staff and meeting with them one-on-one over the next few weeks to understand where there are some
inconsistencies and gaps in deliverables. We want to ensure that the new hire is addressing as many of the
department's needs as possible. Our goal is to have someone hired by June 2026.
