Report No: HR-05-11-2026-02
 City of
 Charlottetown
 Date: May 11, 2026

Directed to Council through the following Committee: Attachments:
Human Resources Committee

Department: Human Resources

Prepared by: Emilee MacLeod, Human Resources Manager

Report Title:
Recruitment Update

Report Purpose:
The purpose of this report is to provide an update to Committee on recent recruitment activities.

Recommendation:
Recruitment Update - For information purposes only.
Report Details:

Recruitment:
- We received 82 applications for the Assistant Tourism & Events Coordinator competition and 41 applications for
the Climate Action Officer competition. Interviews were held last week for the Climate Action Officer position and
interviews are scheduled to take place next week for the Tourism position.
- The internal CUPE 830 competition for Operations Clerk closed on April 27th. There were no internal applications
received. The position is currently posted externally with a closing date of May 12th.
- The external competition for IT Specialist closed on April 30th. Over 60 applications were received, and
interviews will be held later this week.
- The external competitions for Building Inspector II with the Planning Department, Superintendent for the
Wastewater Treatment Plant and Assistant Manager of Water & Sewer Utility will remain open until successful
candidates are selected. Applications are shared with the Managers as they are received, and interviews are
scheduled if candidates meet the minimum requirements.
- The internal CUPE 501 competition for Assistant Ice Maker/Maintenance Person with the Parks and Recreation
Department was successfully filled.
- Applications are currently under review for the Technician II position with the Water and Sewer Utility
Department.
- Interviews were held for the Chief of Police position. The selection committee is now in the process of evaluating
candidates and determining next steps.
- Interviews are scheduled to take place next week for the HR Executive Assistant position.
Council or Committee History:
N/A

Financial Implications:
N/A
