NUISANCE BYLAW
Amendment Summary Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st Reading 2nd Reading 3rd Reading

Supposedly amended nothing Add "Halloween Curfew" section as follows: unknown unknown Supposedly
"Halloween Curfew" 2.17 (a) Unless accompanied by a person over the age of 18 years, no amended
section August 4, 1995 person under the age of 16 years shall be in a public place within the 4-Aug-95
date noted at end of City of Charlottetown between 8:00 p.m. October 31st and 7:00 a.m.
1995 bylaw. No reading November 1st.
papers. (b) In a year that October 31st falls on a Sunday, the restrictions
 provided in paragraph (a) shall also apply from 8:00 p.m. October 30th
 to 7:00 a.m. October 31st.
 (Now re-numbered as Section 2.20 (a) and (b) )

Supposedly amended 1. (g) "Owner" when used in reference to real property Amend definition section "Owner" as follows: unknown unknown Supposedly
several sections. No includes a person assessed for the property pursuant 1.6 "Owner" includes: amended
reading papers; but to the Real Property Assessment Act, R.S.P.E.I. Cap. (a) A person managing the subject property for the registered 30-Aug-95
August 30, 1995 date is R-5; owner;
noted throughout 1995 (b) A tenant, lessee, or other person in possession or occupancy
bylaw as an of the subject property;
amendment date. (c) An executor, administrator, trustee, agent or other person
 managing the subject property for the registered owner;
 (d) When used in reference to real property, includes a person
 assessed for the property pursuant to the Real Property
 Assessment Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, CAP. R-4.
 (Now re-numbered as Section 1.10)
 nothing Add new definition section as follows:
 1.1 "Chief Administrative Officer" means the Chief Administrative
 Officer of the City or his duly appointed representative;

 1. (b) "City Engineer" means the employee of the City Delete definition Section 1. (b) "City Engineer"
 appointed pursuant to a Bylaw relating to highways,
 streets, squares and bridges and defining the duties of
 the surveyor or his designee;

 1. (c) "Clerk" means the Administrator of the City or his Delete definition Section 1. (c) "Clerk"
 duly appointed representative;

 By Play Obstruction Amend "By Play Obstructing" section as follows:
 5. Any person who by coasting, skateboarding or 2.4 Any person who by coasting, skateboarding or roller blading, or
 skating or by throwing or propelling stones, balls, skating or by throwing or propelling stones, balls, snowballs or other
 snowballs or other things, or by playing any game, so things, or by playing any game, so as to molest, harass, or obstruct
 as to molest, harass, or obstruct vehicular traffic or vehicular traffic or pedestrians in the City is guilty of an offence.
 pedestrians in the City is guilty of an offence. (Now re-numbered as Section 2.6)

 15
