value could be given to the potential impact nominees have had on the
 Charlottetown community, without necessarily residing within the City. The CEC
 noted that some other municipalities include the "surrounding region" when
 considering their award recipients. The CEC also suggested collaborating with the
 Indigenous PEI store to manage the award design for the next event, which will take
 place in two years' time.

6. Traffic Control Cabinet Year 2 Artwork Approval
 The details and final artworks for year 2 of the traffic control cabinet project were
 shared with the AAB:

 Moved by Renée and seconded by Omar that the Arts Advisory Board approve the
 four artworks submitted by the following artists for year two of the Traffic Control
 Cabinets:
 - Trudy Spooner, Here I Come, 2026: Cabinet at Allen St / Upper Prince St
 - Bhreagh Krszwda, Vesper Vulpines, 2026: Cabinet at Euston St / Prince St
 - Sofia Cervantes Romero, Bodies in Motion, 2026: Cabinet at Kent St / Prince St
 - Maggie J. Whitten Henry, Nemtaqaq, 2026: Cabinet at North River Rd / Beach
 Grove Rd
 And further, that the artworks and locations be advanced to the City of Charlottetown's
 Planning Board for further consideration. Carried.

 It is expected that the cabinets should be wrapped in the next couple of months.
 Omar suggested that a set of standard design guidelines, especially regarding traffic
 safety, could be prepared and shared with artists to streamline the process.

7. Public Art Policy Draft
 Doug has shared the policy draft with the board members and encourages feedback
 over the next few weeks; it is hoped that it can be approved at the next board
 meeting.

8. City Updates
 We hope the Fiona Wood project will be installed by May. The City budget has been
 passed.

9. New Business
 Stephen reminded us that World Art Day is on April 15 and that Creative PEI has
 several activities planned.

10. Charlottetown Library Learning Centre Mural Draft Call and Process
 Renée left the meeting due to a conflict of interest identified at the beginning of the
 meeting.

 2
