Finance, Audit, Tendering & Administration Committee 3 May 6th, 2026

 Lead: Amy McQuillan - Finance Manager.
 Action: Confirmation on what caused the change in the amount of funds
 request.
 Lead: Amy McQuillan - Finance Manager.

 b. Report FIN-09-2026 - Update on Operational Matters of Interest - Amy
 McQuillan - Manager of Finance.

 Report was presented to provide members of the committee with information
 regarding operation matters believed to be of interest.

 Budget Feedback Survey:
 We are looking to gather some post-mortem information from the leaders on the
 most recent budget process. We want to make this process as streamlined and
 efficient as possible with plenty of advanced communication on timelines and
 expectations. This will be executed through the CAO taskforce, and the survey has
 been compiled with plans to send it out via SurveyMonkey this week. There will be
 a separate survey sent out later which will compile information on the accounting
 systems themselves, so we have a list of criteria when searching for a new system.

 Amy noted that one thing that will be addressed is having a clear timeline/calendar
 of expectations so that departments know in advance when information will be
 needed.

 Training on GP/E-Requestor
 Training was scheduled last week for Isaac and Amy to address the current shortfall
 in our reporting from GP. We are hoping to be able to provide regular reporting for
 the leaders in all departments for expenses and capital. Next will be training on E-
 Requestor and training for leaders in GP if anyone is interested.

 Finance Staffing
 The finance team has still not hired to replace the Senior Accountant position. We
 are reviewing the current profiles of all staff and meeting with them one-on-one
 over the next few weeks to understand where there are some inconsistencies and
 gaps in deliverables. We want to ensure that the new hire is addressing as many
 of the department's needs as possible. Our goal is to have someone hired by June
 2026.

 Councillor Bernard asked if Amy could provide a schedule of all Capital projects. He
 would like to know when the plan to go to tender, when the tender is closing, and
 when work on the projects is expected to start. He believes it would be beneficial
 to Council to have this all laid out so there are clear expectations.
