Committee Report pg. 2
Following the successful launch of the Climate Action Tracker, its positive reception, and its demonstrated value as a
long-term climate governance tool, staff are requesting Council approval to continue the sole source of the Kausal
Watch platform on an annual basis through 2030, subject to annual operating budget approval.

The annual subscription cost for the Kausal Watch platform is $16,800. Budget for this expense has been approved
in the 2026-27 operating budget. By moving to the Kausal platform, savings are found in reduced staff time to
coordinate annual climate action updates and by eliminating spending on graphic design and annual report
creation. Continued investment in the Climate Action Tracker supports Council's commitment to transparency, data-
driven decision making, and long-term climate accountability, while reinforcing Charlottetown's leadership role in
municipal climate action.

Council or Committee History:
In April 2025, Council approved the sole source of Kausal Watch, with funding allocated through the 2025-26
Operating Budget.
Financial Implications:
The cost of the Kausal platform is $16,800 annually, with no commitment to renew. Funds to cover this expense
were approved in the 2026-27 operating budget.
Public Engagement and Communication:
This platform increases efficiency, accountability, and transparency when communicating with the public regarding
the implementation of the Climate Action Plan.
Legislative Authority:
Municipal Government Act - Part 7 on Municipal Jurisdiction.
Strategic Alignment:
Purpose: provide accountable, accessible and fiscally responsive local government to build a sustainable
 and resilient city; Approach challenges and problem-solving with innovation and integrity, by reflecting solutions
that serve the whole community.
Guiding Principles: People-focused, Collaborating, Accountable, Safety.
Commitments: Sustainability, Reconciliation, Collaboration and partnership, Inclusion and representation,
Engagement, Communication.
Pillars: Community-Building and Placemaking, Governance and Civic Engagement; Inclusive Economic Growth;
Infrastructure and the Environment.
Reviewed By:
Manager Director/CAO
JCG April 20, 2026 RDM April 20, 2026
Committee Recommendation: (if differing from staff)
