HORSEDRAWN AND RICKSHAW VEHICLE BYLAW

 Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Bylaw Proposed Amendments

Amendment Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st 2nd 3rd
Summary Reading Reading Reading
Amendments to Section A Horsedrawn Vehicles Section A Horsedrawn Vehicles 12-May- 12-May- 09-Jun-14
define operating 9.(c) Refrain from driving his (a)Not operate the vehicle when under the 14 14
requirements of Vehicle when under the influence influence of alcohol or drugs.
Horsedrawn of alcohol or drugs. (b)Not allowed amplified music to emanate
vehicle. Defining a from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00
Pedicab, Rickshaw p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
and 'Vehicle' and (c)Nothing in subsection 9 (d) relieves a
equipment req. for person from complying with the
those vehicles. requirements of the Nuisance Bylaw.
Designate
rickshaw/pedicab Section B Rickshaw Vehicle
operating area. 1.(b)"Pedicab Vehicles" shall designate a
 three wheeled vehicle, human-powered by
 pedaling, by a person and used
 commercially for the conveyance of
 passengers, such vehicle also referred to
 as a cycle rickshaw.
 (d)"Rickshaw Vehicles" shall designate a
 two wheeled human-powered vehicle
 drawn, manually pulled or pushed by one
 or more persons and used commercially
 Section B Rickshaw Vehicle for the conveyance of passengers, such
 2.The Operator shall not operate vehicle being commonly referred to as a
 his business without holding Rickshaw.
 permits for Rickshaws as (e)"Vehicle" shall for the purposes of this
 provided for under this Bylaw. part refer to a Pedicab or Rickshaw.
 3.
 (1)all woodwork must be sound 2.The Operator shall not operate his business
 and the shafts must be made of without holding permits for Rickshaws or
 hardwood; Pedicabs as provided for under this Bylaw.
 (2)metal parts must not be
 City of Charlottetown
 corroded; 3. For a Pedicab: Page 14 of 16
 (3)a hub must fit on the axle; (i)pedals that are operable at all times to
 (4)the wheels must be made of propel the pedicab,
 wood and be fitted with rubber (ii)hydraulic rear disc brakes and front
