Regular Meeting of Council Page 7 of 8 April 14, 2026

 7.4 Finance, Audit, Tendering & Administration - Councillor John McAleer, Chair
 Councillor McAleer indicated his Committee report was included in the weekend package.

 7.5 Human Resources - Councillor Norman Beck, Chair
 Councillor Beck indicated his Committee report was included in the weekend package. He noted how
 certain senior positions are hired and approved and proposed a change to how Council handles those
 appointments. Council currently has to vote on appointments of the CAO, Chief of Police, Heritage
 Officer and Planning staff (planners); however, Council is not involved in the hiring process and do not
 often have enough background information about the candidate (excluding CAO). He added that the
 Committee will be looking to amend the Staffing Bylaw to reflect the approach they are trying to
 achieve.

 7.6 Strat. Priorities, Comms & Intergovernmental Cooperation - Coun. Justin Muttar, Chair
 Councillor Muttart indicated his Committee report was included in the weekend package.

 With regard to Boulder Park, it was suggested that the City meet with the Province to determine who
 actually controls the property and what rules apply because Council needs to have clear, complete
 information going forward before making decisions related to this property.

 7.7 Protective & Emergency Services - Councillor Julie McCabe, Chair
 Councillor McCabe indicated her Committee report was included in the weekend package.

 The Committee was requested to revisit a resolution passed in December 2019 which supported the
 creation of a Provincial Civil Forfeiture Law.

 7.8 Parks, Recreation & Leisure Activities - Councillor Kevin Ramsay, Chair
 Councillor Ramsay indicated his Committee report was included in the weekend package.

 It was suggested that upgrades or new recreational uses for Rosemount Park be reviewed by the
 department. Councillor Ramsay took this under advisement.

 Moved by Councillor Kevin Ramsay
 Seconded by Councillor Terry Bernard

 RESOLVED
 That Council approves the closure of the interior laneway of the Victoria Park Roadway to
 vehicular traffic, earlier than May 1 to allow for the laneway to be used as an Active
 Transportation Pathway beginning April 15, 2026,

 And that Council authorizes the Manager of the Parks and Recreation Department to make
 future decisions regarding the opening of the Active Transportation Pathway.
 CARRIED 10-0

 7.9 Water & Sewer Utility - Councillor Bob Doiron, Chair
 Councillor Doiron indicated his Committee report was included in the weekend package.

 7.10 Economic, Tourism & Cultural Development - Councillor Terry Bernard, Chair
 Councillor Bernard indicated his Committee had not met since the last meeting of Council. He
 congratulated Charlotte Nicholson on receiving the 2026 Sport Tourism Canada PRESTIGE Rising Star
 Award and announced that Jenna Doucette had been selected as the successful candidate for the
