Committee Report pg. - 2 -

Report Details:
The Traffic Impact Statement (TIS) report completed by EXP Group (see Attachment B), dated April 2, 2026, analyzed
an existing MacDonald's drive-thru location in Fredericton, NB and an existing Tim Horton's drive-thru in Moncton,
NB for the purpose of this study. These observations were taken during peak drive-thru hours during the morning
period (8:00am-9:00am) and afternoon period (12:00pm-1:00pm).

Based on the TIS report, the new MacDonald's drive-thru location is anticipated to generate a total of 135 new trips
in the AM peak hour and a total of 128 trips in the PM peak hour. Based on an analysis of the number of queuing
spaces proposed (19 spaces) in addition to another nine (9) spaces beyond, the development has been deemed by
the reviewing third-party traffic engineer to provide sufficient queuing capacity to handle peak traffic demands
without the drive-thru queuing interfering with site circulation, parking or access based on comparison to similar sites.

The TIS report also recommends that to ensure that vehicles are discouraged from making a left turn out of the
primary access to University Avenue that the existing median barrier on University Avenue adjacent to the proposed
development be extended by an additional 10 metres being approximately half-way between the existing Benjamin
Moore & Co site access and the proposed development access. The TIS also notes that it is not expected that there
would be any sight line issues for the proposed development access.

Conclusion:
The proposed site and queuing plan provides sufficient space to safely operate a drive-thru restaurant located at the
unaddressed parcel on the east side of University Avenue identified as PID# 387761. Therefore and on this basis, the
Planning & Heritage Department recommends that the City Planning Board recommends to City Council that the
application submitted by the owner's agent (Cain Arsenault) and supporting traffic study prepared by EXP Group
dated April 2, 2026 for the development of a drive-thru and queuing spaces at PID# 387761 for a MacDonald's eating
and drinking establishment be accepted.

Council or Committee History:
N/A

Financial Implications:
N/A

Public Engagement and Communication:
Notification is not required for this application. The provision to forward such requests to Planning Board and Council
for consideration in the Zoning and Development By-law was put in place to ensure that the technical merits
associated with the queuing spaces for a drive-thru were properly addressed through professional review. Upon the
recommendation of Council with input from Public Works as well as the findings of the supporting professional traffic
report completed by a licensed traffic engineer, approval can be supported and provided.
