Public Works Committee Meeting DRAFT
Wednesday, April 22, 2026
12:00 PM, Parkdale Room, City Hall

Present: Chair, Councillor Mitchell Tweel
 Councillor Justin Muttart
 Councillor John McAleer
 Mayor Philip Brown

Also: Ylber Gashi, Public Works Manager
 Joey MacKinnon, Public Works Assistant Manager
 Brad MacConnell, Chief Administrative Officer
 Amber Robb, Public Works Administrative Assistant
 Riley Taweel, Public Works Traffic Engineer
 Richard MacEwan, Director of Community Services
 Sophie Hayes, Junior Engineer
 Berry Genge, Junior Engineer

1. Call to Order
Councillor Tweel, Chair, called the meeting to order at 12:02 PM.
 - Mayor Brown provided a petition from residents of Cheasapeake Haven Apartments
 regarding Mina Jane Drive. Chair Tweel stated that the department had recently
 responded to an initial request indicating that the issue is not within Public Works
 jurisdiction and that the petition should be forwarded to the Planning Committee. CAO
 MacConnell will see that the petition is forwarded to the correct department for further
 investigation.
 - Councillor Tweel and Committee members formally recognized Administrative
 Professionals Day, thanking administrative and professional staff city-wide for their
 contributions and ongoing support.

2. Declarations of Conflict of Interest
There were no conflicts of interest declared.

3. Approval of Agenda
Moved by Mayor Brown and seconded by Councillor Muttart that the agenda be approved as
circulated. Carried (3-0).

4. Approval of Minutes
Moved by Mayor Brown and seconded by Councillor Muttart that the draft minutes from April
10, 2026 be approved. Carried (3-0).

5. Business Arising from the Minutes
Mayor Brown sought an update to a request he made at the last meeting regarding a follow-up
meeting being planned for local businesses impacted by the Exhibition Drive Upgrades.
Chair Tweel confirmed that a public follow-up meeting on Exhibition Drive Upgrades is
confirmed for April 27, 2026 (5:30-7:00 PM) at the Civic Centre and that staff have committed
to circulating a summary report from earlier engagement sessions prior to the meeting.
