Committee Report pg. 2
 Department Activities & Highlights:
  Department Activities & Highlights:
  Members participated in the annual Muscular Dystrophy Boot Drive at the Royalty Crossing Mall and
 the "big" Superstore.
  Our newest Relief Firefighters have all accepted their offers and have begun their orientation,
 welcome Colby Smith, Emily Reynolds, Jon Paglia, and Ross Martin.
  Our Firefighter Curling Team from Charlottetown, representing Prince Edward Island well at the 64th
 Canadian Firefighter Curling Championship in Truro, Nova Scotia.

 Training: A very busy training period once again including Level I field training, hands-on defensive
 driving, more Medical First Responders, Hazardous Materials, Pet Rescue and Pet CPR, ice rescue, and
 Incident Command training, plus in-house training on Naloxone, hands on Medical Frist Responder,
 ropes, forcible entry, CPR and AED, Saving-Your-Own, Thermal Imager tips and tricks, the art of
 reading smoke, fire flow paths, and many informal training sessions.

 Our Department Deputy Chief Kent Mitchell remains out of the office as he recovers from his health
 challenges. Our entire Department wishes him a very fast recovery and return to duty. Take care,
 Kent!

 Our entire team, Administration, Fire Inspectors, and Firefighters (career and volunteer) of all ranks,
 have been doing an amazing job of stepping forward with offers to help out in any way possible to
 keep the Fire Department moving forward since the departure of Fire Chief Mamye. We are working
 diligently toward a transition with the new Fire Chief to start work without having too many
 administrative fires to put out.

Council or Committee History:
 - Monthly updates
Financial Implications:
 - Not at this time.
Public Engagement and Communication:
 - N/A
Legislative Authority:
 - MGA
Strategic Alignment:
Our commitment - Transparency to Strength Accountability and Trust.
Reviewed By:
Manager / Director CAO
AFC T. Jenkins B. MacConnell

Committee Recommendation: (if differing from staff)
