NUISANCE BYLAW
Amendment Summary Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st Reading 2nd Reading 3rd Reading

 nuisance.
 (c) Service of the notice referred to in Section 5.2 will be sufficient
 if the notice:
 (i) in the case of service on an individual, is served personally or
 mailed by prepaid registered mail to the address of the Owner
 shown on the then current year's real property assessment roll for
 the Residential Property for which the notice is issued;
 (ii) in the case of service on a corporation, is served personally on
 a director, officer or manager of the corporation or by leaving it at
 or mailing it by registered mail to the registered office of the
 corporation.
 (d) Excessive nuisance abatement fees shall be paid by the
 Owner, as defined in Section 5.2(c)(i) and (ii) upon receipt of
 invoice from the City. If the amount of each such invoice is not
 paid in full before the 31st day of December in the year received,
 upon written notice to the Owner, the amount shall be added to
 and form part of the taxes on the Residential Property, as taxes in
 arrears.
 (e) Nothing in this Part V shall be construed to limit the City's
 other available remedies for violation of this or any other City
 bylaw.
 Nothing Add new schedule:
 SCHEDULE "A"
 EXCESSIVE NUISANCE ABATEMENT FEES
 1. Police Nuisance Response and Abatement Service Call …….
 $195.00/call
 2. City Staff Nuisance Response and Abatement Service Call……
 $ 50.00/hr
 3. Administration Fee………10% on Total Service Call Fees
To add three new Nothing 1.1 "Aggressive Solicitation" means soliciting in a manner that is 11-Apr-16 11-Apr-16 09-May-16
definitions as 1.1, 1.2 likely to cause a reasonable person to be concerned for his or her
and 1.18 and add new safety or security.
section 3.16 and 3.17 1.2 "Captive Audience Solicitation" means when a person is solicited
dealing with solicitation in one of the captive audience situations. These generally refer to a
 person has no choice but to attend/stand in a particular location.
 1.18 "Solicit" means to communicate, in person, using the spoken,
 written or printed word, a gesture or another means, for the purpose
 of receiving money or another thing of value, regardless of whether
 consideration is offered or provided in return.
 Solicitation
 3.17 (a) A person shall not solicit in an aggressive manner in any public
 place.

 27
