Committee Report pg. 2
Report Details:
The request for rezoning was submitted by the applicant representing the owners on March 10, 2026 to the City of
Charlottetown Planning & Heritage Department in pursuit of changing the zoning for the unaddressed property
identified as PID# 390534 from (CDA) to (C-3) to facilitate future development of a new retail shopping development
(60,240 square feet) and new restaurant (4,500 square feet) on a common site as well as rezoning the unaddressed
property identified as PID# 1179670 from (CDA) to (MUC) to facilitate future development of a new retail plaza
(10,340 square feet).

Development Context:
The subject property identified as PID# 390534 is currently a vacant undeveloped interior lot measuring
approximately 2.79 hectares (6.90 acres) in area with approximately 164 metres (538 feet) of frontage to the south
along Towers Road. The unaddressed parcel (PID# 390534) abuts the Confederation Trail immediately to the west,
undeveloped lands to the north and partially-developed lands to the east containing rowhouses. This property is
proposed to be placed within the (C-3) Zone to facilitate larger-scale retail and commercial development (see
Attachment C).
The subject property identified as PID# 1179670 is currently a vacant undeveloped corner lot measuring
approximately 0.32 hectares (0.8 acres) in area with approximately 45 metres (147 feet) of frontage to the south
along Towers Road and approximately 70 metres (230 feet) of frontage to the east along Mount Edward Road. The
unaddressed parcel (PID# 1179670) abuts existing legal non-conforming commercial development (Mount Edward
Grocery) to the north in the (R-2S) Zone and abuts Freda Lane to the west which provides access into a recent
townhouse development further west. This property is proposed to be placed within the (MUC) Zone to facilitate
neighbourhood-oriented commercial development in the form of a commercial plaza (see Attachment C).

LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS:
Notification
If the proposed rezonings are approved to proceed to the public consultation phase, the Planning & Heritage
Department will notify the public of the future public meeting date in accordance with Section 3.10.4 of the Zoning &
Development Bylaw.

ANALYSIS:
As per Section 3.10.3 of the Zoning & Development Bylaw, before amending the zoning of any parcel of land, Council
shall conduct a public meeting to receive the views and opinions of the public and the applicant. Council may, for
reasons that are in the best interests of the City, reject a proposed zoning amendment without public notice and
without referral to a public meeting, but if an application goes to a public meeting, then Council shall determine the
disposition of the application and the applicant may not be allowed to withdraw the application after the public
meeting.

Planning staff are of the opinion that the project has merit with sufficient information provided to date by the
applicant to allow for consideration of the proposed rezonings via the public meeting process with Council.

CONCLUSION:
The Planning & Heritage Department encourages Planning Board to recommend to Council to approve the request to
proceed to public consultation concerning proposed rezoning of unaddressed property identified as PID# 390534 with
frontage on Towers Road from the Comprehensive Development Area (CDA) Zone to the Shopping Centre Commercial
