City of Charlottetown Report No:
 PLAN-2026-05-MAY-6B-3
 Committee Report Unaddressed Properties - Towers Road
 (PID#s 390534, 1179670)

 Date:
 May 5, 2026

Directed to Council through the following Committee: Attachments:
Planning Board A. Air Photo
 B. Zoning Map
Reporting Department: C. Rezoning Master Plan (submitted by applicant)
Planning and Heritage

Other Associated Departments:
None at this time.

Prepared by:
David Douglas Gundrum, RPP, MCIP
Report Title:
Request to proceed to public consultation concerning a proposed rezoning of unaddressed subject property identified
as PID# 390534 with frontage on Towers Road from the Comprehensive Development Area (CDA) Zone to the
Shopping Centre Commercial (C-3) Zone and proposed rezoning of unaddressed subject property identified as PID#
1179670 with frontage on Towers Road and Mount Edward Road from the Comprehensive Development Area (CDA)
Zone to the Mixed Use Corridor (MUC) Zone in order to facilitate future development of commercial uses on both
sites. The application has been made by Cain Arsenault on behalf of the owners Pan American Properties Inc. and
Killam Properties.

Report Purpose:
Evaluation of a request for rezoning of separate parcels from the (CDA) Zone to the (C-3) Zone and from the (CDA)
Zone to the (MUC) Zone, respectively, which form part of the same overall master-planned mixed use development.
Consideration at this point is for a request to proceed to public consultation.

Staff Recommendation:
That Planning Board recommend that Council:

Approve the request to proceed to public consultation concerning a request to rezone the unaddressed subject
property identified as PID# 390534 from the Comprehensive Development Area (CDA) Zone to the Shopping Centre
Commercial (C-3) Zone and to rezone the unaddressed subject property identified as PID# 1179670 from the
Comprehensive Development Area (CDA) Zone to the Mixed Use Corridor (MUC) Zone in order to facilitate future
commercial development on both sites.
