NUISANCE BYLAW
Amendment Summary Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st Reading 2nd Reading 3rd Reading

 considered in those areas north of the Arterial Bypass
 Highway;
 (i) (ii) applications for a hunting zone will be approved or
 denied based on this Bylaw, land use, safety of the
 public, the applicant's past compliance and other
 factors as deemed appropriate;
 (ii) (iii) an updated list of approved hunting zones will be
 maintained in Schedule "A" of this Bylaw, and will be
 valid for a one-year period;
 (iii) (iv) for the purposes of firearms use, hunting shall be
 restricted to the use of shotguns only. Those hunters
 involved in falconry may hunt with the aid of a falcon;
 (iv) (v) while hunting, no person shall discharge an
 approved firearm within 274 meters (300 yards) of any
 school or medical facility;
 (v) (vi) except where provided otherwise in this Bylaw,
 provisions of the Wildlife Conservation Act, R.S.P.E.I.
 1998, Cap. F-12, shall apply to all designated hunting
 zones.
To amend to establish Nothing Add new definition: 13-Jun-05 13-Jun-05 20-Jun-05
enforcement tools 1.10 "Night Time" means the period beginning at 11:00 p.m. and
dealing with noise and ending the following day at 7:00 a.m.
conduct, to reword PART II: GENERAL PROVISIONS Sections rearranged, renumbered and amended as follows:
section on moving Disturbance PART II: DISORDERLY PREMISES/CONDUCT PROVISIONS
buildings to align with 2.1 Any person who, willfully or wantonly rings any 2. Disorderly Premises
current procedures, to doorbell or knocks at any door, building or fence so as 2.1 Any person who disturbs neighbors or passers-by by permitting or
increase penalties and to disturb or annoy any person in his dwelling, place of engaging in shouting, fighting, screaming or the making of any loud
minor housekeeping business, or meeting place is guilty of an offence. noise or any other improper or disorderly conduct in the house or
wording changes Disorderly Premises premises occupied by such person is guilty of an offence.
 2.2 Any person who permits or engages in shouting, 2.2 Any person who permits or engages in any activity that
 fighting, screaming or making of any loud noise or any unreasonably disturbs or tends to disturb the peace and tranquility of a
 other improper or disorderly conduct in the house or neighbourhood is guilty of an offence.
 premises occupied by such person, that is, reasonably Disorderly Conduct
 capable of disturbing the neighbours or passers-by is 2.3 A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, he or she is likely to
 guilty of an offence. create, or has created, a nuisance, by doing one, or more, of the
 2.3 Any person who permits or engages in any activity following:
 that unreasonably disturbs or tends to disturb the (a) Screaming, shouting, yelling, fighting or initiating any other disruptive
 peace and tranquility of a neighbourhood, is guilty of noise, commotion or action on public streets, public places or in any
 an offence. premise adjacent thereto in such a manner as to disturb any person
 2.4 For the purpose of a prosecution pursuant to within the area of audibility;

 21
