Committee Report pg. 2
Report Details:
This project is part of the overall improvements highlighted in the Building Conditions Report completed for the
building. The details of this work is primarily focus on improving the accessibility of the Planning Building located
at 70 Kent Street, Charlottetown. Currently, the vestibule at the Planning Office reception does not meet the
requirements of the current Canadian Accessibility Act. It was determined the most feasible course of action was
to renovate the east entrance of the building to become the new reception area as there are less spatial
constraints compared to the current reception space. This allows the vestibule at the current reception to be
removed, increasing usable building footprint. Additionally, existing doors are being replaced as they are near the
end of their lifecycle, and new interior doors are being constructed to help in separating public facing areas from
office space. Access control infrastructure is being installed on several doors throughout the facility, to increase
the building's security. Finally, the stairwell at the east entrance is being renovated to meet code requirements.

The Request for Tender was posted on February 13, and closed on March 16, 2026, with five (5) submissions
received as outlined below.

 Firm Name Total Submission Price (Taxes Excluded)
 Wilmac Construction $325,922.10
 Leading Edge $282,509.00
 MacLean Construction $269,300.00
 United Structures $346,500.00
 B&S Construction $323,316.19

MacLean Construction Ltd submitted the lowest compliant bid, and based on their proven record of successfully
completing projects for the City, staff are confident in their ability to complete the work in accordance with the
required specifications and standards. As such, staff recommend awarding the contract to MacLean Construction
Ltd in the amount of $269,300, plus applicable taxes. This recommendation is consistent with that of the
engineering consultants who prepared the project drawings and specifications, as outlined in the attached letter
of recommendation.

70 Kent Street was acquired in 2020, with the intention of using this space for City's Planning and Heritage
Administrative Offices. A structural assessment was completed by a professional engineer before the acquisition,
who confirmed that the primary structural system was observed to be in generally sound condition, with no
apparent signs of distress or structural deficiency. The roofing system, however, was identified as being at or near
the end of its service life and in poor condition at the time of inspection. The roof has since been replaced.
The decision to purchase 70 Kent Street was made unanimously by council (noting that councillors Bernard and
Tweel were not present) August 17, 2020. The resolution stated that the City of Charlottetown would enter into a
Purchase and Sale Agreement with RT Holdings Ltd. for the purchase of 70 Kent Street in the amount of
$1,600,000.00, for the purpose of housing the City's Planning and Heritage Administrative Offices. It further
stated that the City would assume the existing mortgage on the property, with the remaining balance to be paid
to RT Holdings Ltd.

The following year council passed a resolution to accept the submission of Entire Electrical Contractors, in the
amount of $460,539.00 (plus all applicable taxes), to replace the roof and HVAC systems, as per the conditions of
the tender "70 Kent Street HVAC and Roof Replacement". The roof and HVAC upgrades were subsequently
completed.
