Pedestrian Mall Bylaw Amended 22-Jul-2025

 3.9. "Vehicle" means a device in, upon, or by which a person or thing may be transported or
 drawn.

4. Establishment of the Pedestrian Mall
 4.1. Council may, by resolution from time to time, close to vehicular traffic for a period set by
 Council in the resolution any street or part thereof for the purposes of establishing a
 Pedestrian Mall thereon.

 4.2. Council may, by resolution from time to time, set the days and hours during which a
 Pedestrian Mall may operate.

 4.3. Except as otherwise provided in the Bylaw, the Pedestrian Mall shall not be subject to the
 "Traffic Bylaw" in the City of Charlottetown.

5. General Control of the Mall
 5.1. This Bylaw shall be administered and enforced by such Licensing Inspector(s) as appointed
 by the City from time to time.

6. Activities on the Pedestrian Mall
 6.1. Except as otherwise provided in the Bylaw, the pedestrian mall may be used by all
 pedestrians for all purposes for which a sidewalk may be used in addition to the purposes
 for which the pedestrian mall may be used pursuant to this Bylaw.

 6.2. Any person who wishes to carry on any activity, render any service, or set up any display on
 a pedestrian mall, which is not specifically permitted or prohibited by this Bylaw must make
 application for a license to the Planning and Heritage Committee. The Planning and Heritage
 Committee shall review the application and shall make such recommendations as are
 appropriate to Council. Council upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and
 Heritage Committee, shall make the final decision regarding the issuance of a license and
 may, in its sole discretion, require the applicant to enter into an agreement which may
 include, but is not limited to the following:
 (a) liability insurance;
 (b) the dates during which the Pedestrian Mall may be used;
 (c) any fees to be charged for use of the Pedestrian Mall; and
 (d) hours of operation

 6.3. Notwithstanding anything in Section 6.2 of this Bylaw, any person who has been issued a
 license or permit to carry on business on the pedestrian mall under the City's Street Vendors
 Bylaw, as amended from time to time, need not apply for a permit under this Bylaw to carry
 on the business he is authorized to carry on under the license issued under that Bylaw.

 6.4. A license granted by Council shall be subject to compliance by the License Holder with the
 provisions of this Bylaw, any agreements made pursuant to this Bylaw, and all other
 applicable federal, provincial and municipal laws and regulations.

City of Charlottetown 2
