Regular Meeting of Council Page 2 of 8 April 14, 2026

 - Special Meetings of Council - March 4, 16, 19, 23 & 31, 2026
 - Public (Planning) Meeting of Council - March 26, 2026
 CARRIED

 5. Business Arising out of the Minutes

 - Special Meeting of Council (March 23, 2026) - At this meeting, Mayor Brown asked Council who was
 in favour of the overall New Initiatives which included exclusion of six career firefighter positions. Councillor
 Tweel along with Councillors Doiron and McCabe were recorded as being opposed that evening. Councillor
 Tweel voiced he has always been in favor of a fourth firefighter being added to the fire engine when the
 engine leaves the station. He opposed the "New Initiatives" package because it did not include adding a
 fourth firefighter to each truck. Mayor Brown indicated that Council voted on the full "New Initiatives"
 package that evening, not specifically on the fourth firefighter.

 6. Council Inquiries to be taken Under Consideration
 It was proposed that Council consider expanding the parking strategy to include underground/structured
 solutions with a clear lead and follow-up on exploring that option.

 7. REPORTS OF COMMITTEES/RESOLUTIONS/BYLAW READINGS

 7.1 Planning & Heritage - Deputy Mayor Alanna Jankov, Chair
 Deputy Mayor Jankov indicated her Committee report was included in the weekend package. She
 indicated that Planning Resolution #4 re: site-specific amendment for 147 Hillsborough Street
 (PID# 342907) is to be removed as it will be going back to Planning Board for further discussion.

 It was questioned whether the Irving Oil redevelopment on Euston Street truly qualifies as a heritage
 project, and a thorough review was requested to determine which, if any, historical elements are
 actually being preserved. Deputy Mayor Jankov indicated she would take this under advisement.

 Moved by Deputy Mayor Alanna Jankov
 Seconded by Councillor Julie McCabe

 RESOLVED:
 That Council approve the Major Variance for the subject property addressed as 191 Cumberland
 Street (PID# 346718) to allow for:

 1. An addition (covered exterior basement entry) to project into the rear yard setback by 4.03
 metres (13.22 feet); and

 2. Eaves to project into the rear yard setback by 5.4 metres (17.72 feet).
 CARRIED 10-0

 Moved by Deputy Mayor Alanna Jankov
 Seconded by Councillor Julie McCabe

 RESOLVED:
 That the Major Variance for the subject property addressed as 28 Lewis Point Road (PID#
