City of Charlottetown Report No:
 PLAN-2026-05-MAY-6C-1
 Committee Report
 Date:
 May 5, 2026
Directed to Council through the following Committee: Attachments:
Planning Board A. Proposed Site Plan
 B. Traffic Impact Statement
Reporting Department: C. Aerial View
Planning and Heritage

Other Associated Departments:
N/A

Prepared by:
David Douglas Gundrum, RPP, MCIP
Report Title:
Request for a new MacDonald's drive-thru queuing and stacking plan for property identified as PID# 387761
(University Avenue). The application has been made by Cain Arsenault on behalf of the owners (Killam Investments).

Report Purpose:
The subject property is zoned Shopping Centre Commercial (C-3) Zone, where an automobile service station and an
eating and drinking establishment are permitted uses among many others. Surrounding land uses along the
established University Avenue corridor primarily include eating and drinking establishments, retail stores, and grocery
stores among other complimentary uses (see Attachment C).

The subject property is currently vacant and undeveloped with a lot area of approximately 3,775 square metres (0.93
acres) and a lot frontage along the west side of University Avenue of approximately 35 metres (115 feet). The property
is bounded to the north by a commercial lot in the (C-3) Zone containing an existing commercial plaza, to the south
by a lot also in the (C-3) Zone containing an existing Bank of Montreal branch and to the east by parking lot areas that
form part of the larger site for the Royalty Crossing shopping mall, also in the (C-3) Zone.

The proposed site for the MacDonald's drive-thru has frontage and access to University Avenue from the east side of
the street. University Avenue in this area is a 4-lane arterial roadway having a fifth lane which functions as a centre
turning lane as well as bike lanes and sidewalks to facilitate and support active transportation. Planning staff note
that this application is primarily traffic related and that the accompanying professional traffic report submitted by
experts in this field provide a qualified analysis and opinion to assess the overall impact of the proposed drive-thru
with respect to the local road network.
