Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Amendment Bylaw (#2018-10-A)

 3. Purpose

 3.1 The purpose of this Bylaw is to regulate the operation of horse-drawn vehicles, pedicabs,
 and rickshaws within the City of Charlottetown in order to:
 a) ensure public safety;
 b) protect animal welfare;
 c) regulate commercial passenger conveyance; and
 d) maintain public order and cleanliness

 5.2. Renumber all subsequent sections accordingly.

6. The City of Charlottetown Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Bylaw is hereby amended by the
 following:
 6.1. Add the following Definitions:
 4.1 In this Bylaw:

 a) 'Act' means the Municipal Government Act.
 b) 'City' means the City of Charlottetown.
 c) 'City Council' means the Mayor and other Members of the Council of the City.
 d) 'Operator' means anyone who operates a business involving the conveyance of passengers
 in Horsedrawn or Rickshaw Vehicles other than the driver of such a Vehicle;
 e) 'Pedicab Vehicles' means a three and four-wheeled vehicle, human-powered by pedaling, by
 a person, either with or without electric assistance, and used commercially for the
 conveyance of passengers, such vehicle also referred to as a cycle rickshaw.
 f) 'Police Officer' means and includes any Constable, Cadet, Inspector, Special Constable or
 Police Commissionaire employed or appointed for the preservation and maintenance of the
 public peace and order or for the service or execution of judicial process.
 g) 'Power-Assisted Bicycles' means a vehicle that:
 i. is equipped with an electric motor or a motor having a piston displacement not
 greater than 50 cubic centimeters,
 ii. is not capable of achieving a speed greater than 50 kilometers per hour on level
 ground when driven by a person weighing 60 kilograms, and
 iii. has no more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
 h) 'Street' means includes roads and highways. The terms street, road and highway are used
 interchangeably and refer to the Rights-of-way used for vehicular traffic.
 i) 'Vehicle' means a device in, upon, or by which a person or thing may be transported or
 drawn.

7. The City of Charlottetown Horsedrawn and Rickshaw Vehicle Bylaw is hereby amended by the
 following:
 7.1. Add new headings:
 Part I - HORSEDRAWN VEHICLES

 5. Interpretation

City of Charlottetown 2
