NUISANCE BYLAW
Amendment Summary Previous Wording Amendment Detail 1st Reading 2nd Reading 3rd Reading

 City, or any private notices whether placed by the time mentioned therein for the happening of any event.
 authority of the City on public property or not, the Private Parties
 City has the power to remove any such notice upon 3.2 Except where approved through a license issued by the PEI Liquor
 the happening of any events stated therein or after Control Commission, any person who offers or permits the use of or
 the time mentioned therein for the happening of any gathers at any non-residential property or building for the purpose of
 event. playing music, dancing or similar entertainment beyond the hour of 1:00
 Fires, Fireworks a.m., unless otherwise approved by Council, is guilty of an offence.
 2.10 Any person who makes or lights any fire in any
 street, or who sets fire to any fireworks within the
 City unless specially authorized by the Council is
 guilty of an offence.
 2.16 The moving of buildings within the City shall be Amend former 2.16 [new 3.10] as follows:
 done only under the written authority of the Chief 3.10 The moving of buildings within the City shall be done only under
 Administrative Officer or his designate. Written the written authority of the Planning Department. The moving permit
 authority shall include the course to be followed and shall include the course to be followed and, where applicable, the
 the place occupied overnight. location the building will occupy overnight.
 (a) Any person who moves or causes to be moved (a) Any person who moves or causes to be moved any building on
 any building on any of the streets or squares of the any of the streets or squares of the City without an approved permit,
 City without written permission, is guilty of an is guilty of an offence.
 offence. (b) Any person, in so moving or causing to be moved any such
 (b) Any person in so moving or causing to be moved building or apparatus used in moving, who fails to sufficiently
 any such building or any apparatus to stand on any light such building or apparatus in a manner that may cause
 street at night without being sufficiently lit to prevent danger to passengers and traffic is guilty of an offence.
 danger to passengers and traffic generally is guilty
 of an offence.
 3.1 (a) Every person who commits an offence under Amend former 3.1(a)(1) [new 4.1(a)] as follows:
 this Bylaw is guilty of an offence, punishable on 4.1 Every person who commits an offence under this Bylaw is guilty of
 summary conviction and liable to: an offence, punishable on summary conviction and liable to:
 (1) a minimum fine of not less than $100 and not (a) a minimum fine of not less than $200 and not more than $500 for
 more than $500 for a first offence and a minimum a first offence and a minimum fine of not less than $400 and not more
 fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000 than $1,000 for any subsequent offence;
 for any subsequent offence;
 Renumbering throughout bylaw; and minor wording changes in new
 Sections 3.12, 3.13(1) and 3.15
To amend Section 3.11 3.11 Any person who throws, puts, places, or lets Amend as follows: 12-Dec-05 12-Dec-05 09-Jan-06
with respect to garbage fall any litter, trash (paper or otherwise) dirt, filth, or 3.11(a) Except where otherwise provided in Section 3.11(b) or
receptacles other nuisance matter on any street, square, lane, (c), any person who throws, puts, places, or lets fall any litter, trash
 sidewalk, wharf or bridge of the City, or from any (paper or otherwise), dirt, filth, or other nuisance matter on any street,
 street, square, lane, sidewalk, wharf or bridge upon square, lane, sidewalk, wharf or bridge of the City, or from any street,
 any adjoining property is guilty of an offence. square, lane, sidewalk, wharf or bridge upon any adjoining property is
 guilty of an offence.

 23
