Pedestrian Mall Bylaw Amended 22-Jul-2025

 6.5. Failure to comply with Section 6.4 may result in a revocation or suspension of a license
 granted by the Licensing Inspector, and upon a license being suspended or revoked by the
 Licensing Inspector, the Licensing Inspector shall notify the License Holder thereof by
 delivering a notice to him personally or by mailing a double registered letter to the address
 provided by the License Holder and after that notice has been delivered the License Holder
 shall not carry on his business until a new license is issued or his suspended license is
 reinstated.

 6.6. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Bylaw, the following activities are prohibited
 on the pedestrian mall:
 a) skateboarding;
 b) roller skating;
 c) the riding of bicycles; and
 d) the throwing of projectiles of any nature or kind.

 6.7. No person shall bring, ride, or leave standing any horse or any other animal of any kind
 whatsoever onto the pedestrian mall excepting a service animal.

 6.8. Except as specifically provided in the Bylaw, no person shall bring, drive, operate or leave
 standing any vehicle on the pedestrian mall.

 6.9. Section 6.6 of this Bylaw does not apply to:
 a) a baby carriage;
 b) a stroller;
 c) a wheelchair whether manually or mechanically operated;
 d) a pushcart for which a license plate has been issued and which is permitted to be
 brought onto the pedestrian mall under the City's Street Vendors Bylaw, as amended
 from time to time.
 e) an emergency vehicle responding to an emergency; or
 f) a service animal.

 6.10. Any person whose license has been suspended or revoked by the Licensing Inspector may
 appeal such suspension or revocation to Council.
 a) An appeal to Council shall be in writing, shall be filed with the Chief Administrative
 Officer within fifteen (15) days of the receipt by the License Holder of the notice of
 the suspension or revocation as provided by Section 6.5.

 b) The Council shall hear such appeals at such time and place as it may determine and,
 on an appeal under this Bylaw, Council may confirm, reverse or vary the decision of
 the Licensing Inspector.

City of Charlottetown 3
