                                                                                                    6




Budget Overview
Council’s Budget Priorities
  1. Capital asset management
  2. Core service delivery
  3. Managing growth of the City

Legislative Framework
The City of Charlottetown engages in a comprehensive budget preparation process to allocate
resources effectively. In doing so the City must adhere to the Municipal Government Act of
Prince Edward Island (the Act) and the Financial Plan Regulations (the Regulations). The Act and
Regulations set out the rules for how the City must handle its money, including budgeting,
planning for future expenses, and keeping track of assets. The legislation refers to the City
budget as a Financial Plan.

Key legislative requirements from the Act:
   The fiscal year for the City is April 1 to March 31 [S149(1)]
   On or before March 31 in each year, City Council shall by resolution adopt a budget for the
   upcoming fiscal year. [S150(1)]
    City Council must provide public notice and hold a public meeting regarding the budget not
   less than two weeks before it receives final approval and is adopted. [S151(1)]
   A copy of the final approved budget shall be filed with the Minister of Municipal Affairs by
   April 15 of the fiscal year that it was adopted. [S150(4)]


Budget Basics
Each year, the City updates its Financial Plan and goes through a budget process to determine
how much it will need to spend in the upcoming fiscal year:
   Maintain current levels of service (base operating budget)
   Incorporate service level enhancements or reductions
   Incorporate new operating initiatives
   Fund Capital Projects
This Financial Plan includes the Operational Budget and Capital Budget for:
    City of Charlottetown
    Charlottetown Water and Sewer

Water and Sewer Services
In 2024, the average residential customer paid $655.15 for water and sewer services for the year.
With a 2.2 per cent increase this year, we anticipate the average residential customer will pay
$669.56 in 2025. This amounts to an increase of $14.41 annually, or four cents a day.




                                                                                              6
