Introduction from the Chair of the Finance,
Audit, Tendering and Administration Committee
                            This year’s budget process has been a little bit different to any other we’ve
                            gone through. For example, this has been the most transparent budget that
                            we have engaged in as a City. Every meeting that could be held in an open
                            session and livestreamed to our YouTube channel was held in open and
                            recorded. Every debate, every question, every priority was brought to the
                            forefront for public consumption; you, the taxpayer, were able to watch a
                            realistic approach to planning the next fiscal year as it happened.

                           Last fall, members of Council met with senior City staff to identify a
                           strategic direction and set clear priorities for the upcoming budget. We
                           were fortunate to have the Community Survey results to provide an in-
                           depth review of what our community prioritises and, combined with what
                           we heard through conversations with residents, we were prepared for the
weeks of discussions and reviews that budget always brings. We also considered forecasts and global
economic trends as we approved the planned projects and initiatives that can realistically be
completed during the fiscal year.

An unescapable fact is that Charlottetown continues to grow. We’re excited for the opportunities
growth brings but mindful of the investment required to maintain, update and build new infrastructure,
to improve our facilities and to increase services. We knew this budget had to reflect our community’s
focus on increasing feelings of safety, so policing features prominently. It also contains a small increase
in Water and Sewer rates to help maintain our infrastructure and cover rising administrative costs.
As you look through this budget book, I’m confident that you’ll see an appropriate balance in
addressing urgent capital and operational needs; that balance is the result of months of hard work. The
figures tell the story of a strategic approach to prioritizing projects and initiatives to be prudent and
responsible while enabling ongoing investments to continue sustainably preparing for the growth of our
City while maintaining the excellent quality of life you deserve.

                                                                      Councillor John McAleer




                                                                                                    4
