About the City of Charlottetown
Serving as the capital city of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown is known as the "Birthplace of
Confederation" due to the historic 1864 Charlottetown Conference that paved the way for
Confederation. Dynamic and sustainable, our scenic waterfront city serves as the seat of government
and is a vibrant hub of culture and education.

With its burgeoning knowledge economy and strategic location, Charlottetown attracts global
businesses in diverse sectors including biotechnology, financial services, information technology, and
manufacturing. Supported by a skilled workforce and a favorable business environment, the City's key
sectors drive economic growth and innovation.

Charlottetown offers an unparalleled quality of life, featuring a blend of big city amenities, cultural
events, and recreational opportunities within a safe, clean environment characterized by a strong
sense of community. As a major tourism destination and designated Cultural Capital of Canada,
Charlottetown hosts year-round attractions such as the renowned Charlottetown Festival and serves
as a venue for high-quality meetings and conventions. Moreover, Charlottetown has emerged as a
prominent sport sport tourism destination, boasting state-of-the-art sports facilities and hosting major
sporting events throughout the year.

With its rich history, diverse and vibrant culture, thriving economy, and exceptional quality of life,
Charlottetown continues to attract residents, businesses, visitors, and sports enthusiasts from around
the globe.




                      Land Acknowledgement
                     In the spirit of Reconciliation, we acknowledge that
                     the land upon which we gather is unceded Mi’kmaq
                    territory. Epekwitk (Prince Edward Island), Mi’kma’ki,
                       is covered by the historic Treaties of Peace and
                      Friendship. We pay our respects to the Indigenous
                      Mi’kmaq People who have occupied this Island for
                          over 12,000 years; past, present and future.
                                                                                                  3
