                                                                                                      1




About the City of Charlottetown
Charlottetown, the capital city of Prince Edward Island, is known as the “Birthplace of
Confederation” due to the historic 1864 Charlottetown Conference, which set the stage for
Confederation.

It is recognized as the unceded territory of the Indigenous Mi'kmaq People.

Charlottetown serves as the seat of the PEI government and is a vibrant hub of culture and
education, home to two post-secondary institutions, the University of Prince Edward Island and
Holland College.

With a growing knowledge economy and strategic location, Charlottetown attracts global
businesses across sectors such as biotechnology, financial services, information technology and
manufacturing. Supported by a skilled workforce and a favorable business environment, these
industries drive economic growth and innovation.

Offering an exceptional quality of life, Charlottetown combines big-city amenities with cultural
events and recreational opportunities in a safe, clean environment that fosters a strong sense of
community. As a port city, Charlottetown is a major tourism destination and designated Cultural
Capital of Canada, hosting year-round attractions, including the renowned Charlottetown
Festival, that takes place in the Confederation Centre of the Arts, located in the heart of our
downtown.

Our City also serves as a premier venue for meetings and conventions and has become a
leading sport tourism destination, featuring state-of-the-art facilities and hosting major sporting
events throughout the year.

With its rich history, vibrant culture, thriving economy and outstanding quality of life,
Charlottetown continues to attract residents, businesses, visitors and sports enthusiasts
from around the world.




Land Acknowledgement
In the spirit of Reconciliation, we acknowledge that the land upon which we
gather is unceded Mi’kmaq territory. Epekwitk (Prince Edward Island), Mi’kma’ki,
is covered by the historic Treaties of Peace and Friendship. We pay our respects
to the Indigenous Mi’kmaq People who have occupied this Island for over 12,000
years; past, present and future.
                                                                                                1
