About the City of Charlottetown
Charlottetown is the capital city of Prince Edward Island and a growing coastal community
home to approximately 48,700 residents. The Greater Capital Region and surrounding area has
a population of approximately 96,500 and makes up over half of the Island’s total population.
Known as the “Birthplace of Confederation,” Charlottetown hosted the 1864 Charlottetown
Conference, which played a pivotal role in the formation of Canada.

The Epekwitnewag Mi’kmaq have occupied Epekwitk (Prince Edward Island) for over 12,000
years, long before the arrival of English, Scottish, Irish, and Acadian settlers throughout the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Today, Charlottetown is home to an increasingly diverse
and multicultural population from around the world.

As the beating heart of the Island, Charlottetown’s economy is strongly influenced by the public
sector, alongside established industries such as retail trade and tourism. The city is also home to
several global companies in the knowledge-based economy and is the regional hub for
emerging and high-growth sectors, including bioscience, information and communications
technology, and advanced manufacturing and food processing.

Charlottetown is a vibrant tourism destination, attracting over 1.6 million visitors annually, driven
by leisure tourism, sport and business event hosting, and cruise arrivals. As a premier event host
city, residents and visitors benefit from a lively year-round calendar of festivals and events.

Characterized by historic Victorian architecture, a bustling waterfront boardwalk, a vibrant arts
and culture scene, and a reputation for world-class local dining, Charlottetown is widely
recognized as an attractive place to live, work and visit. Residents enjoy a safe, walkable city
and a high quality of life, supported by proximity to nature, strong community connections, and a
wide range of educational, recreational and cultural amenities. Charlottetown is consistently
ranked among national and international publications as an affordable place to live and an
ideal location to start or grow a business.




Land Acknowledgement
In the spirit of Reconciliation, we acknowledge that the land upon which we
gather is unceded Mi’kmaq territory. Epekwitk (Prince Edward Island), Mi’kma’ki,
is covered by the historic Treaties of Peace and Friendship. We pay our respects
to the Indigenous Mi’kmaq People who have occupied this Island for over 12,000
years; past, present and future.
                                                                                                        4
